Chapter 1 - The Early Farming Dispersal Hypothesis in Perspective
=================================================================

First Farmers: The Origins of Agricultural Societies by Peter Bellwood
    
    
    
    
    
  

  

Chapter 1

The Early Farming Dispersal 

Hypothesis in Perspective

Most of us subsist today, and always have done in historical memory, on foods 
derived mainly from the products of domesticated plants and animals. Even "wild" 
foods such as fish, lobsters, and mushrooms are frequently farmed. The human 
status as top mammal depends without question on food production. Hunting and 
collecting entirely from the wild could not possibly support even a tiny fraction of 
the world's current population.

The development of the agricultural systems that provide virtually all of the world's 
food has occurred over many millennia, and still proceeds apace. The nature of farming 
today is under continuous pressure as environments react to the load of billions of 
hungry humans and to the curse of climatic unpredictability. Genetic modification of 
crops and animals promises (for some) a brave new world. We are living through a 
crucial period in human history, perhaps a turning point with respect to the future, a 
period of colossal technological, economic, and demographic change. We have good 
right to think that the current rapid rate of change in all aspects of life has never been 
matched in history or prehistory.

But was the world of "real" prehistory, for instance in 5000 or 3000 BC, just a quiet 
forgotten fuzz of peaceful background noise, enlivened only by the occasional glimmer 
of action in places such as Egypt and Mesopotamia? In actuality, there are indications 
that the world then was just as busy in its own way as it is now, albeit without such 
huge populations or global networks of communication. This book suggests that 
major episodes of human movement occurred from time to time, in various parts of 
the world, as different populations developed or adopted agriculture and then spread 
farming, languages, and genes, in some cases across vast distances. To unravel the 
histories of these upheavals, which impacted eventually upon all the world's populations, even those living far from agricultural latitudes, is a complex matter. This is partly because the tales told by archaeologists, linguists, and geneticists often do not 
correlate very conveniently.

In order to approach what often appears to be a debate in which specialists all 
talk past each other, concerned only with data from their own discipline, this book 
is framed around a fairly simple multidisciplinary hypothesis. The early farming dispersal hypothesis postulates that the spreads of early farming lifestyles were often 
correlated with prehistoric episodes of human population and language dispersal 
from agricultural homelands. The present-day distributions of language families 
and racially varied populations across the globe, allowing for the known reassortments that have ensued in historical times, still reflect to a high degree those early 
dispersals.

Of course, there are some provisos. The early farming dispersal hypothesis is not 
claimed to have any absolute explanatory power. It is only by understanding why it 
works for some situations, and not for others, that we can improve understanding of 
the last 12,000 years of the human past in a meaningful way. Furthermore, the 
hypothesis suggests that major episodes of population expansion occurred as dependence upon farming grew, and such expansions tend to imply fairly strong correlations 
between populations, languages, and cultures, just as they have in the recent colonial 
past. However, it is an easy matter to point to situations where cultural complexes, 
language families, and complexes of related genes do not correlate in their distributions at all well, particularly in the record of ethnography and amongst living peoples. For instance, people of quite different biological appearance often speak related 
languages, even the same language. But such situations need not imply that the 
hypothesis is automatically wrong, or that language, culture, and biology never 
correlate at the population level. Indeed, many of these seemingly disjunctive situations reflect normal and expectable processes of population admixture occurring 
sometimes during, and sometimes long after, the episodes of dispersal described in 
the following chapters.

It is also important to emphasize right from the start that the early farming dispersal hypothesis is not claiming that only farmers ever dispersed into new lands or 
established language families in prehistory. Hunter-gatherers feature widely in this 
book since their lifestyle, in terms of long-term stability and reliability, has been the 
most successful in human history. It fueled the initial human colonization of the 
whole world, apart from a number of oceanic islands. It is not my intention to put 
farming on a pedestal, but merely to examine its impact on the world of our postPaleolithic ancestors.

The farming story also gives all of the world's ancient farming populations a kind 
of equality, in the sense that so many peoples and cultures contributed, not just an 
elite few. We have clear signs of relatively independent agricultural origins in western 
Asia, central China, the New Guinea highlands, Mesoamerica, the central Andes, the 
Mississippi basin, and possibly western Africa and southern India. These developments 
occurred at many different times between about 12,000 and 4,000 years ago. The 
agricultural systems concerned spread at remarkably different rates - some quickly, 
some slowly, some hardly at all.

First Farmers: The Origins of Agricultural Societies by Peter Bellwood
    
    
    
    
    
  

  

The Disciplinary Players

In order to understand these cultural and biological expansions in historical perspective, 
we need to examine data drawn from several different fields of study. Firstly, we have 
archaeology, the study of ancient human societies from their material traces left in or 
on the ground. Archaeology occupies most of this book and is a discipline that has the 
advantage of dealing directly with evidence created at the time in question, evidence 
which often can be precisely dated by radiocarbon dating or other absolute methods. 
But it has the obvious disadvantage that such evidence is always fragmentary and 
sometimes very ambiguous, often reflecting trivial aspects of human existence. Interpretation of the archaeological record in terms of the patterns and relationships of 
ancient societies, especially in prehistory, is not an easy matter.

Secondly, we have comparative linguistics, with the emphasis on comparative 
reflecting the fact that our periods of concern are so long ago that they always 
predate the invention of writing and thus directly documented history. Admittedly, 
some anciently written languages such as Egyptian and Hittite can add valuable data, 
but, for the most part, comparative linguists present their reconstructions of the histories of language families from a comparison of many languages either still spoken 
or recorded very recently. There is an advantage here over archaeology in that the 
database, in the case of a living language, is normally complete (a whole society cannot 
operate using only half a language), but linguists have no direct window through time 
on ancient preliterate people actually conversing. Neither do they have precise chronological methods in the absence of historical or archaeological dates. A proto-language 
or family tree is a reconstruction; an ancient village or cemetery is real.

Thirdly and fourthly, we have the two disciplines contained within the overarching 
field of biological anthropology, these being skeletal anthropology and archaeogenetics. 
The former, like archaeology, is the study of material drawn directly from the past, 
in this case human skeletons (or parts thereof ), items which are of course quite 
common in archaeological contexts. Ancient bone can also contain traces of DNA 
and methods are now available to extract and study this, although in practice this 
kind of research is still in its infancy and so far few results have been published which 
reflect directly on the large-scale historical issues under discussion here.

Archaeogenetics (Renfrew 2000) is the other side of the biological coin, and this 
discipline is currently undergoing a major growth spurt. Archaeogeneticists study 
genetic material drawn from living populations and create their historical interpretations in several ways, mainly by reconstructing the molecular ages and dispersal 
geographies of lineages within non-recombining mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) and 
the non-recombining portion of the Y chromosome, or by comparing populations 
in terms of multiple genetic systems within their recombinant nuclear DNA. Like 
comparative linguists, therefore, archaeogeneticists draw their data from the present, 
but their samples are rarely complete in the way that a living language can be complete, 
because of sampling constraints at both the population and genomic levels.

In support of these major disciplines we have many others which provide 
very important data. Within the natural sciences we have paleoclimatology and geomorphology, both studying changes in the earth's environments over time, and 
those fields within zoology and botany which study the origins and histories of 
domestic animals and plants. We also have anthropology with its ethnographic 
corpus of observations about real human behavior in traditional societies. Then 
we have physical dating methods based on radioactivity, and chemical methods 
of tracing artifacts to sources. A multitude of sciences contain somewhere within 
their vast fields of endeavor some techniques or observations which can help us to 
understand the deep past.

But the ultimate discipline that transcends all others is history, not just history as 
written down in books, but the history of humanity as it has unfolded worldwide 
over at least the past 12,000 years. Historical interpretation from a comparative 
perspective is our goal, and in this quest the disciplines of archaeology, comparative 
linguistics, and archaeogenetics are just handmaidens.

First Farmers: The Origins of Agricultural Societies by Peter Bellwood
    
    
    
    
    
  

  

Broad Perspectives

This book owes its origin to a consideration of two primary observations:

1. Prior to the era of European colonization there existed (and still exist) a number 
of very widespread families of languages, the term "family" in this sense meaning that the languages concerned share common ancestry, having diverged from 
a common forebear (Figures 1.1 and 1.2). These language families exist because 
they have spread in some way from homeland regions, not because they have 
converged in place out of hundreds of formerly unrelated languages.

2. Within the early agricultural past of mankind there have existed many widespread 
archaeological complexes of closely linked artifactual style, shared economic basis, 
and relatively short-lived temporal placement. In the archaeological literature 
these complexes are generally referred to as (Early) Neolithic in the Old World, 
and (Early) Formative in the New. Again, these spreads have occurred from 
homeland regions, and most such complexes tend to become younger as one 
moves away from regions of agricultural origin (Figure 1.3). Most importantly, 
many agricultural homelands overlap geographically with major language family 
homelands, in highly significant ways.

Let us look at these two observations in a little more detail. Firstly, the language 
families. Why, for instance, does the Austronesian family of languages have more 
than 1,000 member languages, spread more than halfway around the world? By what 
mechanisms did the languages ancestral to this family spread over such a vast area? 
Similarly, why did the Indo-European family have almost an equal extent of spread 
prior to AD 1500, from Bangladesh to northwestern Europe, but in this case across 
continents rather than oceans? Both of these language families had virtually attained 
their AD 1500 distributions long before the existence of any written records or conquest 
empires. The ethnographic record gives us no comparative examples of spread on such scales. The recent historical record most certainly does, especially for recently 
spread languages (not language families!) such as English, Spanish, Malay, Arabic, 
Mandarin, and Cantonese. But when, why, and how did the prehistoric spreads occur? 
Are the recent situations of large-scale language spread relevant for comparative 
purposes?

Figure 1.2 Map of the major language families of the New World. Modified from 
Encyclopaedia Britannica, 15th edn (1982), Macropaedia vol. 11, p. 957; vol. 13, p. 210; 
vol. 17, p. 110.

Secondly, why do we find, from time to time, immense spreads in the archaeological 
record of stylistically related material culture over huge distances, far greater in homogeneity and total extent than in previous or following cultural periods? In prehistory, examples include the Pre-pottery Neolithic cultures of the early farmers of Southwest 
Asia; the Balkan, "Danubian," and Mediterranean coastal cultures of early Neolithic 
Europe; the early iron Age cultures of eastern and southern Africa; the Early and Middle 
Formative cultures of the Americas; the Lapita culture of the western Pacific and its 
antecedents in the islands of Southeast Asia; and the earliest prehistoric assemblages 
of the islands of Eastern Polynesia and New Zealand (Figure 1.3). All are far greater 
in extent than any conceivable single political unit, at least as far as the ethnographic 
record of small-scale farming societies is concerned.

Figure 1.3 The origins and approximate directions of expansion of agricultural systems 
and early farming cultural complexes. The upper map shows the major regions of 
agricultural origin attested in the archaeological record (see also Diamond and Bellwood 
2003, figure 1). The lower shows some very widespread cultural complexes of the early 
agricultural world (see also Bellwood 2001b, figure 1).

It will be noted that these archaeological spreads tend to correlate fairly closely 
with relatively early phases in the agricultural prehistories of the regions concerned, 
or with initial human settlement in the (eastern) Lapita and Polynesian cases. Again, 
the ethnographic record as it pertains to material culture does not appear to reflect 
linked spreads of such vast extent. For example, the ethnographic artifact assemblages 
(stone adzes, fishhooks, personal ornaments, and the like) of the various Eastern 
Polynesian archipelagos in AD 1770, at the time of Cook's voyages, reveal to us many 
more differences between island groups than those visible in the archaeological record 
of these islands 1,000 years ago, soon after initial settlement occurred. The same is 
even truer of the Melanesian islands, if the very varied ethnographic assemblages are 
compared with those of the more uniform Lapita cultural horizon of 3,000 years 
ago. We discuss these complexes in more detail later, but both illustrate a situation of 
increasing cultural divergence through time following the establishment of a widespread and relatively homogenous foundation culture across a very broad region.

Some of these spreads in the linguistic and archaeological records may be hard to 
explain, but common sense dictates that dispersals of related populations with common 
lifestyles and languages must have occurred in human prehistory, and deserve careful 
consideration as causes of ancient homogeneity of patterning. The archaeological 
record is sufficient to suggest this, since with early agriculture there commenced 
in many agricultural homeland regions an unprecedented growth in the size and 
density of the human population. This was especially true for Southwest Asia, China, 
Mesoamerica, and the northern Andes. The potentials here for cultural, language, 
and population spread are not hard to visualize.

The expansions of early farming populations that form the subject matter of this 
book reflect two consecutive processes:

1. the periodic genesis of new cultural (archaeological) or linguistic configurations 
in homeland circumstances;

2. the dispersal of such configurations into surrounding regions and their subsequent 
transformations, in situations either of pristine colonization (no prior humans), 
or in the presence of other populations.

The transformations within such configurations, both during and after dispersal, can 
occur via adaptive or chance modifications to the inherited pattern (thus giving 
relationships of descent, or phylogeny), or via interactions with other contemporary 
human populations, including culturally and linguistically related as well as unrelated groups (thus giving rise to a process termed reticulation). Throughout history, the 
relative significances of these two kinds of modification have not been unchanging. 
Human societies within, or just emerging from, a dispersal or colonization mode, 
especially if the dispersal has been relatively rapid and extensive, will reflect descentbased relationships very clearly. It is within societies of this kind that we can expect 
to see clear correlations between cultural/ linguistic and biological variation. Societies long embedded in an interactive mode under conditions of geographical stability 
will not reveal such correlations.'

One of the suggestions that will dominate the chapters in this book is that short 
bursts, or "punctuations," of dispersal by closely related populations over very large 
areas have occurred from time to time in human prehistory, especially following the 
regional beginnings of agriculture or the acquisitions of some other material, demographic, or ideological advantages. Punctuations also occurred when humans first 
entered regions previously uninhabited, such as Australia, the Americas, and the 
Pacific Islands. These bursts have actually occupied very little of the total time span 
of human history. Often their effects are confusingly hidden beneath the reticulate 
interactive networks that have linked varied populations through the long millennia 
of subsequent history. But their underlying impacts on the course of human history and 
on the generation of subsequent patterns of human diversity have been immense.

First Farmers: The Origins of Agricultural Societies by Peter Bellwood
    
    
    
    
    
  

  

Some Key Guiding Principles

At this point it is necessary to present a number of key guiding principles held with 
respect to certain essential aspects of human behavior and history. These inform 
much of the reconstruction of early farming dispersal presented in this book.

1. The range of individual human behavior patterns can be treated as relatively uniform 
during the time span of agriculture.

Given the modern biological unity of mankind, individual human behavior patterns 
of 10,000 years ago were probably essentially similar in their range to those of today. 
Thus, desires for economic and reproductive success, peer-recognition, freedom from 
fear and disease, plus capacities for calculated altruism and morality, have presumably always characterized anatomically modem humans like ourselves. So too have 
abilities to be acquisitive and destructive. There is no evidence to suggest otherwise, 
although this opinion is impossible to justify with complete certainty. It is maintained as a working hypothesis underpinned by uniformitarian principles.

2. Specific events in the prehistoric past cannot necessarily be reconstructed through 
direct analogy with the ethnographic record.

Despite the uniformitarian perspective on individual human behavior just offered, 
the overall historical trajectory of the human prehistoric past at the group /population 
level cannot be interpreted in uniformitarian fashion, and certainly not from the 
comparative perspective of events observed in the ethnographic record. Ethnography 
is not a complete and reliable guide to the structure of pre-ethnographic history. Concatenations of events (particular historical situations with contingent and unique 
causative trajectories) occurred in prehistory for which the ethnographic record need 
have absolutely no parallels. One class of such situations involves ethnolinguistic 
dispersal on the scale of the major language families. Another involves the colonization 
of new continents and archipelagos by hunter-gatherers and Neolithic farmers - 
Australia, the Americas, and Oceania.

The world of ethnography is not one which reflects an expansive mode - it contains no records of trans-continental population dispersal of the kinds we see, for 
instance, in recent Western colonial history, and it is mostly a record of societies 
under pressure from Western civilization (with some marked exceptions, of course, but 
insufficient to disprove the majority rule). This does not mean that the ethnographic 
record is worthless in terms of the issues discussed here. It is extremely valuable, and 
aspects of it will be discussed at length from a comparative perspective below. But 
this record will not be privileged as a mechanism for supporting or refuting hypotheses of major historical significance derived from archaeology or linguistics.

3. Specific events in the prehistoric past cannot necessarily be reconstructed through 
direct analogy with the written historical record, although the written record may be more 
relevant than the ethnographic for situations involving population expansion.

The written historical record is less affected by the strictures that afflict ethnography 
and covers a full record of human activity replete with ethnolinguistic expansion and 
retraction, from the first documentary records bequeathed to us by the Sumerians, 
Akkadians, and Egyptians of the third millennium BC to the historically recent dispersals of Arabs, Chinese, and western Europeans. This record may be, in general, more 
valuable for comparative evaluation of the broad-scale ethnolinguistic hypotheses 
raised in this book than that from recent tribal ethnography. The historical record is 
particularly useful for a comparative perspective on how languages have spread over 
vast territories in recent history, territories far greater in extent than any single polity, 
yet of similar extent to those we must visualize for the dispersal of the foundation 
levels of many of the world's most extensive language families.

4. Scale is a significant factor in culture-historical explanation.

Reality at the single-society level is a cross-cutting mosaic, a result of generations of 
cultural diffusion, intermarriage, and bilingualism - in general, of the activities of 
socialized and advantage-seeking human beings. If one takes a comparative worldwide 
view, however, the perspective can change. On this level, it is possible to progress 
beyond the cross-cutting mosaics of localized human diversity to a different and much 
greater scale, where both history and geography extend far beyond the boundaries of 
particular ethnographic or archaeological communities. In such continental-scale situations, the irregularities of small-scale reality become "ironed out." Prehistory at this 
scale is more than just the sum of an infinitude of archaeological and ethnographic 
situations; it involves a different vista on humanity, one totally unimaginable from 
the activities recorded in the shrinking and circumscribed world of ethnography. The 
expansion, for instance, of the Austronesian language family cannot be explained 
simply by invoking the interactive processes involving bilingualism and even language 
shift that we witness between the members of adjacent ethnographic villages. Scale matters in interpreting prehistory. Archaeological and historical linguistic interpretations on continental scales are far more than just ethnographic observation written 
large.

Population dispersal has undoubtedly been a very important process in human affairs 
at all times. It has occurred throughout prehistory and in the light of written history, 
both into empty spaces and into previously occupied continents. It has been a fundamental driving force in the development of many cultures since humanity began, 
going back into the primeval days of the first hominid exodus from Africa. It might 
also have led, especially with landowning agricultural societies, to an intensification 
of some of those concepts of social ranking and property around which many historical 
societies have been built (Bellwood 1996d).

Admittedly, population dispersal has always been a symptom of prior causes in the 
long-term evolution of humanity, rather than an external cause or prime mover in its 
own right. But that does not lessen its significance. Without it, humans would still be 
living in some African Eden, or indeed might not exist at all.
