Chapter 3 - The Beginnings of Agriculture in Southwest Asia
===========================================================

First Farmers: The Origins of Agricultural Societies by Peter Bellwood
    
    
    
    
    
  

  

Chapter 3

The Beginnings of Agriculture in 

Southwest Asia

Southwest Asia is by far the best-known region in world prehistory for the transition 
to agriculture, especially its western portion, generally known as the Levant. The 
Southwest Asian trajectory does not necessarily provide the model for all the other 
areas of transition, but it had, in terms of world significance, the greatest impact on 
subsequent human affairs, followed closely by that in China.

The setting for the transition to agriculture in Southwest Asia was a zone of open 
woodlands and grasslands, with stands of wild cereals and legumes, that forms part of 
what has become famous in archaeology as the "Fertile Crescent" (Figure 3.1). This 
runs from the Jordan Valley northwards through inland Syria, into southeastern 
Turkey (Anatolia), then eastwards through northern Iraq, and finally southeastward 
along the Zagros foothills of western Iran. Today, the Fertile Crescent receives annually more than 200 millimeters of relatively reliable winter-focused rainfall, being flanked 
to its south by desert and to its north and east by high mountains. It is essentially a 
zone of gentle gradients with ample areas of alluvial soil, where climatic conditions 
allowed rain-fed agriculture to develop without elaborate irrigation requirements.

Some very significant points may first be noted about the transition to agriculture 
and plant/animal domestication in the Fertile Crescent:

1. It was closely related in timing with the first stable and continuing amelioration of 
post-glacial climate, focused on the period between 9500 and 7500 BC (calibrated 
radiocarbon dates).

2. It occurred in a region of winter rainfall with very marked rainfall seasonality.

3. It involved a combination of cereal, legume, and animal domestication, a combination of unrivalled productive significance in world prehistory (Diamond 2002).

4. It was aceramic and Neolithic in technological orientation (i.e., no pottery in the 
early stages, and no smelted as opposed to hammered metal).

5. It evolved from a baseline of complex hunting and gathering, with presumed 
sedentary or near-sedentary settlements.

6. It was revolutionary, both in tempo and in impact on the western/central Eurasian and northern African cultural canvases.'

The Quaternary pollen record from Southwest Asia, in combination with other 
paleoclimatic indicators, outlines the transformations of climate and vegetation that 
have occurred since 20,000 years ago.' In the Fertile Crescent, the last glacial maximum 
was a period of cold dry conditions, with widespread relatively treeless steppes. 
Average temperatures were 4° or more below present and wild cereals apparently 
existed only in protected refuge areas. Between 15,000 and 12,000 BC there were rises 
in temperature, rainfall, and atmospheric carbon dioxide almost to present-day levels, 
but they were episodic (see Figure 2.3). About 11,000 Bc, an unusually rapid and 
severe swing took the region back into cold and dry glacial conditions, a situation 
that lasted until about 9500 BC. This cold phase is termed the Younger Dryas.

The Younger Dryas was followed after 9500 Bc by a very rapid re-warming, by as 
much as 7°C in average annual temperature, to Early Holocene conditions; warm 
and wet, with increased winter rainfall, and increased summer monsoon rainfall in 
some southerly regions. These conditions were excellent for a widespread radiation 
of wild cereals and legumes. Just as important, they were associated with the establishment of a high level of climatic stability. Between about 9000 and 7300 Bc, domesticated cereals, legumes, and herd animals rapidly acquired dominant roles in human 
subsistence throughout Southwest Asia. If this association with the onset of a relatively 
stable and encouraging Holocene climate was pure coincidence, then it was one of 
the most remarkable coincidences ever to occur in human prehistory.

First Farmers: The Origins of Agricultural Societies by Peter Bellwood
    
    
    
    
    
  

  

The Domestication of Plants in the Fertile Crescent

Using available palynological data (van Zeist and Bottema 1991; Hillman 1996; Moore 
et al. 2000), it is possible to offer a fairly specific reconstruction of where the wild 
cereal species ultimately to be domesticated were distributed on the eve of domestication and agriculture. If Gordon Hillman's reconstruction (Figure 3.1) is correct, they 
would have grown mainly in the western and northern parts of the Fertile Crescent, 
rather than in the colder and more continental east. The botanical and archaeological 
evidence is in accord with this reconstruction and suggests that plant cultivation also 
began in this area.'

As stressed by Jared Diamond (1997), Southwest Asia has the largest area of Mediterranean climate (hot dry summers, cool wet winters) in the world, plus the greatest 
range of altitudinal variation within this climatic category. It also has the largest 
number of large-seeded annual wild cereal and pod-bearing legume species (legumes 
include broad beans, peas, chick peas, and lentils) of any region of Mediterranean 
climate, all genetically programmed to germinate and grow through the short daylengths of the wet winter and to remain dormant in seed form in the ground during the hot dry summer. Annual cereals tend to have larger grains than perennial ones 
because of the function of the grains as food stores during dormancy. Fortunately for 
humans, those cereals and legumes chosen for ultimate domestication also happened 
to be self- rather than cross-pollinating. In other words, useful characters developed 
as a result of human management would not be easily swamped out of successive 
generations by back-crossing with wild plants, especially if such modified varieties 
were planted beyond the normal ranges of the wild forms. Stable lines of domesticates 
could be developed from the beginning. These botanical advantages possessed by 
Southwest Asian cereals were of fundamental importance.

Moving now to the cereals themselves, the wheat species termed emmer (a hulled 
tetraploid') and einkorn (a hulled diploid) were the first to be widely cultivated in the 
Fertile Crescent, together with barley and rye. Actual domesticated (morphological) 
features in these cereals are present in a few sites by about 8500 BC, although domesticated rye is currently claimed much earlier than this at Abu Hureyra in Syria. By 
8000 BC, naked-grained (free-threshing) tetraploid and hexaploid wheats had also made 
an appearance. Bread wheat, a naked-grained hexaploid, was brought into domestication following an introgression between emmer and a wild species of goat grass. 
Barley was cultivated initially in its natural 2-row form, with the higher-yielding 
6-row barley developing rapidly through cultivator selection in well-watered environments. Wild 2-row barley has a widespread distribution across Southwest Asia 
extending to western Anatolia, North Africa, and Afghanistan, but occurrences in 
archaeological contexts' suggest initial cultivation in the Fertile Crescent. Emmer is 
of Levant origin, and einkorn is currently believed to have originated in southeastern 
Anatolia.

The legumes pea, lentil, and chickpea were all of Levant origin, possibly from 
an area encompassing northern Syria and southeastern Anatolia, but none of these 
occur in domesticated form until after 8000 BC, later than emmer and barley on 
present evidence (Ladizinsky 1999; Lev-Yadun et al. 2000; Garrard 1999). Another 
important domesticate of the Fertile Crescent was flax, the fiber source for linen, 
attested in Neolithic textile remains from dry caves in Israel.

From the viewpoint of those populations making the transition to agriculture, 
wild cereals and legumes have characteristics that we might consider not very userfriendly. Their ears and pods disintegrate or burst open when they are ripe so that 
the grains can disperse - for cereals this is referred to as shattering, or dehiscence in 
the case of the legumes. The grains are also encased in tough protective glumes 
(Figure 3.2B) so they can survive predation during dispersal and dormancy. Individual grains, ears or pods on a single plant will not ripen synchronously, causing 
difficulties for efficient harvesting. The wild Southwest Asian cereals and legumes 
will only germinate and mature during a relatively fixed period each year (autumn to 
spring), owing to their sensitivity to temperature, moisture, and day-length variations 
and their requirements for vernalization. Early wild cereal and legume exploiters 
would probably have wanted to harvest the ears or pods slightly unripe, before the 
seed dispersal phase triggered by full ripeness. They would then have needed to dry 
the grains in the sun or roast them, before grinding.'

Figure 3.2 Ear, spikelet, and grain of wild (A, B, C) and domesticated (D, E, F) einkorn 
wheat, Triticum monococcum. From Zohary and Hopf 2000.

The overall impact of the domesticatory process by humans has been to alter, 
especially for the Southwest Asian cereals (but also for all other major world cereal 
crops), all the wild states listed above toward a non-shattering habit when ripe, grains 
held loosely within weak glumes (naked grains), synchronous ripening in individual 
plants and across stands, lessened dormancy of the grains (meaning they can be 
planted year-round as long as water is available), larger grains, and larger and more 
compact ears (Figure 3.2D). Obviously, cereals with such features will not be well 
equipped to survive by themselves in the wild - but then they will not need to with 
human cultivators at their service. From a perspective of population numbers, 
domesticated plants and animals can be stated to benefit just as much as humans 
from a mutualistic domesticatory relationship.

A major question that arises with all these crops is that of how many independent 
domestications occurred for each of them. This is an important issue, since if most 
crops were only domesticated once, as believed by Daniel Zohary (1996, 1999) and 
Mark Blumler (1998), then it could imply that hunter-gatherers all over late Pleistocene 
Southwest Asia did not simply start, independently, cultivating the wild cereals that 
just happened to be growing near their camps. It implies that, once domesticated, 
the major cereals and legumes spread "pre-emptively" throughout the burgeoning 
agricultural world, rendering it non-economic for anyone to attempt to domesticate 
separate local wild varieties. At present the genetics behind this issue are a little 
clouded; whereas einkorn is claimed to have been domesticated in just one locality in 
the Karacadag Mountains of southeastern Anatolia (Heun et al. 1997), the evidence 
for the other crops is not so clear and more than one domestication event is likely, 
especially for barley (Jones and Brown 2000; Willcox 2002).

Despite the uncertainty, it has recently been claimed that all the main founder 
crops of the Near East were domesticated within a single small area of northern Syria 
and southeastern Anatolia, an idea driven partly by the limited distribution of the 
chick pea in wild form. This suggests almost a single point of origin for the Near 
Eastern Neolithic, a possibility that cannot easily be negated and one that would be 
of great importance were it to be independently verified (Lev-Yadun et al. 2000; 
Gopher et al. 2001).

First Farmers: The Origins of Agricultural Societies by Peter Bellwood
    
    
    
    
    
  

  

The Hunter-Gatherer Background in the Levant, 

19,000 to 9500 ac (Figure 3.3)

The archaeological course toward domestication in the Levant can be traced from 
around 19,000 BC, at the peak of the last glaciation. At that time, people camped at a 
locality called Ohalo II, on the shoreline of the Sea of Galilee, were exploiting local 
wild stands of emmer, barley, pistachio, grape, and olive (Nadel and Herschkovitz 
1991; Herschkovitz et al. 1995; Nadel and Werker 1999). The Sea of Galilee formed 
the northern part of the much larger Pleistocene Lake Lisan, which filled the Jordan 
Valley for a continuous 220 kilometers. The Ohalo II camp covered 1,500 square 
meters, a surprisingly large area for a site of this period. The inhabitants constructed at least three oval pole and thatch huts, stored their food supplies in pits, buried their 
dead in flexed postures in shallow pits covered by large stones (like the Natufians much 
later), and utilized a toolkit of Upper Paleolithic blade type, together with basalt 
bowls and pestles. At this time, available data suggest a very low population density 
for Southwest Asia, with most regions having a cold climate with perennial shrubby 
vegetation. Ohalo was an environmental "refuge" zone, possibly a fairly ephemeral 
one, and cereals would not have flourished outside warm sheltered areas such as this.

After 15,000 Bc, an archaeological complex known as the Geometric Kebaran 
developed in the southern Levant ("geometric" here refers to the shapes of the 
characteristic microlithic stone tools). These people lived in caves or small campsites 
mostly under 300 square meters in area, reaching about 1,000 square meters maximum. They are assumed to have been seasonally mobile and possibly to have moved 
between winter lowland camps in valleys and summer camps at higher altitudes. 
They also used stone mortars and pestles, and at Ein Gev III near the Sea of Galilee 
they built small circular huts with stone foundations. One presumes they harvested 
wild cereals like their Ohalo predecessors, but, unlike their Natufian successors, they 
apparently still did not use stone sickles. The Atlas des Sites du Proche Orient (Hours 
et al. 1994) lists 51 archaeologically investigated locations occupied during the 
Geometric Kebaran period in the Levant, and only three contemporary locations for 
all other regions of Southwest Asia. But this may, of course, be telling us more about 
current foci of archaeological research rather than any absolute patterning.

By 12,500 BC, the Geometric Kebaran microlithic industry was evolving into its 
Natufian descendant.' In an overall sense, sites increased markedly in number and 
area during the Natufian; the Atlas des Sites du Proche Orient shows 74 locations of this 
period for the Levant, and 26 contemporary non-Natufian locations in Anatolia and 
the Zagros. But numbers are not all, for site areas through the whole Natufian region 
are estimated to have ranged up to five times larger on average than those of the 
Geometric Kebaran. This suggests that the human population was increasing rapidly, 
especially during the early Natufian, before the commencement of the Younger Dryas 
cold phase (11,000 to 9500 Bc). Belfer-Cohen and Hovers (1992) give a total of 417 
excavated Natufian burials as opposed to only three from the preceding Upper 
Paleolithic - also an apparent indication of increasing human numbers at this time.

Unfortunately, soil conditions in most Natufian sites mean that few plant remains 
survive, but there are some hints that wild cereals, especially barley, were being 
exploited, in the drier regions at least. As in the Geometric Kebaran, many sites have 
basalt mortars and pestles. The early Natufian site of Wadi Hammeh 27 (11,500 Bc) 
has remains of wild barley, together with bone sickle handles with microlithic stone 
blade inserts (Edwards 1991). The stone-bladed sickle, indeed, seems to have come 
into common use in the central Levant during the Natufian, although as Patricia 
Anderson (1994) points out, such tools could have been used for cutting reeds as well 
as cereals. The Natufian-related site of Mureybet IA in northern Syria also has remains 
of wild barley, einkorn, and lentils at about 10,500 BC (van Zeist 1988).

Newly published observations from the site of Abu Hureyra, near Mureybit on the 
Middle Euphrates, bring the Natufian (or a close cousin - here perhaps better termed Epipaleolithic) right into the forefront of the debate about early domestication. 
According to Gordon Hillman and his colleagues (Hillman 1989; Hillman et al. 2001; 
Moore et al. 2000), the inhabitants of this site were impacted upon quite heavily by 
the Younger Dryas cold dry phase, after 11,000 BC. This caused a disappearance of 
woodland and encouraged the inhabitants to harvest wild wheat and rye. The rye, 
quite surprisingly, shows domesticated characteristics as early 10,700 BC, three grains 
being dated by AMS radiocarbon. At the same time in the site record there is an 
appearance of the seeds of weed species known to favor arable land. However, it is 
likely that the extreme levels of climatic variability made the experiment a relatively 
short-lived one at Abu Hureyra, because the site was almost abandoned for a millennium immediately after the Younger Dryas. Yet the situation indicates that cereal 
domestication was perhaps imminent in many terminal Pleistocene contexts in Southwestern Asia.

Full and continuing domestication as a basis of village life was not to occur at Abu 
Hureyra for another two thousand years or so, when the site was reoccupied at 
about 8500 BC, after an apparent abandonment. The arrival of domesticated cereals can 
clearly be seen in the paleobotanical record from the site, as well as from the population estimates offered by the excavators. In the Epipaleolithic Phase (Abu Hureyra 1) 
the population was perhaps 100 to 200 people, living in an apparently sedentary small 
village mainly by hunting and gathering, plus a minor amount of rye cultivation. In 
the Neolithic phase (Abu Hureyra 2) at about 8000 BC, by which time domesticated 
crops were absolutely dominant in the economy, the population had risen dramatically 
to between 4,000 and 6,000 people (see Figure 3.4).

The Natufian also reveals some intriguing cultural developments in the direction of 
increasing "social complexity." Some sites have large cemeteries - about 60 burials, 
for instance, in the cave of Mugharet-el-Wad and 50 in Nahal Oren, both in Israel. 
Some settlements were quite large; the early Natufian site of Ain Mallaha, on the 
ancient shoreline of Lake Huleh in northern Israel, covered about 2000 square meters 
and is estimated to have contained up to 12 circular huts with sunken stone-lined 
floors at any one time. Ain Mallaha and Abu Hureyra both produced small amounts of 
imported Anatolian obsidian. All such indications, not to mention the bone-carving 
art, the edge-ground axes, and the sickle blades, make the Natufian and its Middle 
Euphrates cousins look something akin to an "affluent forager" expression, complete 
with a significant degree of settlement sedentism, some degree of social differentiation, and a high population density. What better background for a trajectory toward 
planting and cultivation, given the instability of such a forager adaptation in the risky 
and changeable environment imposed on the Levant by the Younger Dryas? The 
choice for village-dwelling plant collectors, faced by shrinking supplies in circumstances 
of increasing cold and dryness, would have been either to fall back on increasing nomadism and population shrinkage, or to move toward deliberate planting and cultivation 
of food supplies and further population growth. The post-Natufian archaeological 
record leaves no doubt as to which option was the more successful.

There is a strong attraction in this viewpoint of cultural change driven by a Younger 
Dryas engine of stress, a viewpoint favored by many current authorities,' albeit recently challenged by Tchernov (1997) and Cauvin (2000). However, it should be 
pointed out that the actual archaeological evidence for Natufian sedentism (based on 
settlement complexity, presence of commensal animals, etc.) is by no means perfect, 
and neither is that for social differentiation.9 Neither, as we will see later, is there any 
precise correlation, outside the single example of the few grains of morphologically 
domesticated rye at Abu Hureyra, between the Younger Dryas and the widespread 
appearance of domesticated plants in the archaeological record. The latter, on present 
indications, only appeared in quantity perhaps 500-1,000 years after the Younger 
Dryas and the Natufian had both ended. So if the Younger Dryas was a trigger, the 
gun took quite a while to go off.

First Farmers: The Origins of Agricultural Societies by Peter Bellwood
    
    
    
    
    
  

  

The Pre-Pottery Neolithic and the Increasing Dominance of 

Domesticated Crops

The initial millennium after the Natufian in the Levant was termed by Kathleen 
Kenyon the Pre-Pottery Neolithic A (PPNA, ca. 9500 to 8500 Bc), in her reports on 
the 1950s excavations in Jericho. Not surprisingly, the PPNA was followed in Kenyon's 
terminology by the PPNB (ca. 8500-7000 Bc) (Figure 3.3). Then followed a period of 
agricultural and environmental decline in the central Levant, currently termed the 
PPNC, although Kenyon herself did not use this term since it reflects the results of 
more recent research. Apart from the rather ephemeral rye at Abu Hureyra, domesticated cereals and legumes first appeared in the later part of the PPNA or early 
PPNB, after 9000 Bc (Garrard 1999; Colledge 2001).

There are a number of cultural aspects which either first appeared or became more 
emphasized in the Pre-Pottery Neolithic as a whole, emphasizing that society was 
changing from a hunter-gatherer to an agriculturalist mode. Such aspects include:

Very major increases in maximum settlement sizes, with some PPNA settlements reaching 3 hectares and some late PPNB ones reaching an almost-urban 
16 hectares (Figure 3.4), sizes which leave no doubt that the settlements were 
permanently occupied by essentially food-producing populations by the end of 
the PPNA (Bar-Yosef and Belfer-Cohen 1991; Kuijt 1994, 2000a).

2. Architectural innovations, expressed in the common use of sun-dried mud bricks, 
use of lime plaster on walls and floors, and a gradual shift from the prevailing 
Natufian and PPNA circular house forms into the PPNB subdivided rectilinear 
forms which have dominated Old World domestic architecture ever since 
(Flannery 1972).

3. The appearance of "monuments" and communal structures in many of the larger 
sites, for instance the PPNA round tower and walls at Jericho, and many other 
examples of shrine-like buildings excavated recently in sites from southern Jordan 
to southeastern Anatolia. Associated with some of these are monumental stone 
carvings, the most celebrated being the T-shaped pillars carved with relief animals 
and humans from the sites ofGobekli Tepe and Nevali Cori in southeastern Anatolia.

4. Widespread modeled clay figurines of human females (the famed and muchdiscussed "Mother Goddesses"), often emphasizing aspects of sexuality and 
fertility, together with the architectural display of cattle skulls, as in Jerf el Ahmar 
and Mureybet in Syria, ca. 9000-8500 BC, and later in the shrines of catalhoyiik 
in Anatolia. Jacques Cauvin has recently identified this "revolution of symbols" 
as one of the major underlying driving forces behind the evolution of the Southwest Asian Neolithic.

5. The removal of the skulls from human burials and apparent veneration of them 
as ancestors by placing them inside houses, even in the PPNB modeling their 
faces in clay with painted features and shell eyes (Kuijt 1996; Garfinkel 1994). 
Associated with this interesting phenomenon there appear, in the PPNB especially, 
large communal burial facilities, with bones placed either in pits or in constructed 
charnel houses. Flexed headless burials were commonly placed under house 
floors.

6. An early decline in the frequency of microliths, and their replacement by fully 
polished axes and some widespread and very uniform categories of sickles and 
"projectile points" or awls made on large blades (Figure 3.5).

7. A trend, according to examination of use-wear and gloss on sickle-blade edges, 
toward increased harvesting of ripe grain during the course of the Pre-Pottery 
Neolithic (Unger-Hamilton 1989, 1991; Quintero et al. 1997). Successful harvesting of large quantities of ripe grain, using flint sickles, could only occur if the 
grain had already developed a non-shattering habit through domestication.

Most importantly, the economic record of the Pre-Pottery Neolithic period as a 
whole indicates increasing reliance on domesticated crops, matched by an appearance 
of the first domesticated animals, especially sheep and goats. By soon after 7000 Bc 
we witness a common and widespread use of pottery, an item of great significance in 
allowing the preparation of soft cereal-based foods such as gruels and porridges - 
foods which seem rather minor to us today but which, for a population consuming 
mainly gritty bread beforehand, could have opened a door toward early weaning, 
more rapid population growth, and much less toothache (Molleson 1994; de Moulins 
1997).10 Pottery-making also required an appreciation of pyrotechnics, and this undoubtedly led eventually to the discovery of metallurgy. PPN sites do not have 
smelted metal, but they often contain small items of hammered copper such as beads 
and awls, a sure sign that technological innovation was well on its way.

Of course, not all these changes appeared de novo in the Pre-Pottery Neolithic. 
Female figurines played a profound role in Upper Paleolithic art in Eurasia, and skull 
removal is also known from the Natufian. But head- (or skull-) veneration certainly 
indicates an increasing interest in "ancestors," as does communal burial. The ethnographic record leaves no doubt that ancestors often correlate with the existence of 
lineages. In turn, lineages often correlate with concepts of ownership of defined 
pieces of food-producing land - the "corporate land-holding descent group" has long 
been a major attraction for anthropological research. Many hunters and gatherers, 
and cultivators who live at low population densities where land is a free good, have bilateral social structures without clearly defined lineages. But when populations 
become more packed, when access to land becomes worthy of some formal recognition, when "ownership" has to be demonstrated by something tangible, then we 
see the existence of rights of access to land expressed through genealogy or descent. 
And a genealogy requires an ancestor, from whom descent needs to be traceable 
to the satisfaction of one's peers (perhaps by having the skull of such a person 
on display!).

Figure 3.5 Stone tools of the PPNA and PPNB phases from Jerf el Ahmar and Tell Halula, 
Middle Euphrates. 1) Helwan point; 2) Jerf el-Ahmar point; 3 and 4) lustred sickle blades; 5) 
El-Khiam point; 6) Hagdud truncation; 7) semi-circular scraper; 8) endscraper; 9) awl; 10) piercer; 
11) flaked adze of Euphrates Valley type (Erminette de Mureybet). Drawn by Mandy Mottram.

Indeed, the archaeological record reveals that early agriculture in Southwest Asia 
first appeared in areas where small parcels of fertile and doubtless valuable (and 
inherited?) land were located close to good water resources. This was the main 
attraction of those late PPNA sites in the Levant which have the oldest potentially 
domesticated cereal remains; all were located near springs, lakes, or riverine water 
sources. Such sites include Jericho, Netiv Hagdud, Gilgal, Tell Aswad, Abu Hureyra, 
and Mureybet. Early agricultural sites elsewhere, such as Ali Kosh in Khusistan, had 
similar advantages. Some of these sites were also located outside the regions where 
wild cereals would have grown naturally, thus requiring purposeful importation and 
planting by the human populations resident there.

It may be little more than common sense to observe that early cultivation required 
water, and given rainfall unreliability in the Fertile Crescent the obvious place to 
grow plants would be close to a reliable water source from which simple "irrigation" 
techniques (filling an animal skin with water, for instance) could be applied when 
necessary. For instance, carbon isotope discrimination research suggests that some 
form of irrigation was practiced at PPNB Tell Halula in Syria (Araus et al. 1999). But 
the main point, of course, is that such land was relatively scarce and valuable. This in 
itself could have stimulated a growth in the size of individual settlements such as 
Jericho with its remarkable perennial spring, for reasons of its access to well-watered 
farmland. Such growth doubtless stimulated in time a parallel growth in the ranking 
of the population into those with more and those with less - the roots of institutionalized inequality. But that is another story.

First Farmers: The Origins of Agricultural Societies by Peter Bellwood
    
    
    
    
    
  

  

How Did Cereal Domestication Begin in Southwest Asia?

Experiments by Gordon Hillman and Stuart Davies have revealed that non-shattering 
genomes in wheat and barley could be selected for very quickly if people consistently 
sickle-harvested their grain fairly ripe, and replanted it. They suggest (1990:189) that 
"domestication could be achieved within 20-30 years if the crop is harvested nearripe by sickle-reaping or uprooting, and if it is sown on virgin land every year [with 
seed] taken from last year's new plots." George Willcox (1999), however, notes that 
wild and domesticated cereals occurred together for over a millennium before the 
latter became fully dominant, so it is likely that the domestication process in reality 
was not quite so single-minded, despite its ultimate ascent to glory.

One key to domestication seems to have been presented to those ancient harvesters 
who used stone sickles to cut non-domesticated and ripe cereal ears (ripeness is an important feature here). They would have shaken each plant during the cutting 
process, with the result that grain from those ripe ears with a genetic predisposition 
to non-shattering would have been collected more successfully than normal freeshattering grain. The latter would have been lost into the ground in fairly large 
quantities. Uprooting of the plant would have had a similar effect, but beating or 
shaking of grain into a basket or bag would have been selective in the opposite 
direction. If the non-shattering grains selected by sickle harvesting or uprooting were 
later planted, especially in a new plot away from existing wild stands, it is easy to 
understand how an extremely powerful selective process toward non-shattering forms 
could have commenced, leading rapidly to the appearance of visibly domesticated 
plants (Wilke et al. 1972; Heiser 1988).

Yet, the first widespread occurrence of morphologically domesticated cereal remains, as determined from rachis segments and glume structures, only appears in the 
archaeological record at the end of the PPNA or in the Early PPNB, at about 8500 BC, 
and several centuries after the end of both the Younger Dryas and the Natufian." 
The Natufians, it seems, did not domesticate their cereals on a permanent basis. It is 
of great interest in this regard that studies of the glossed edges of Natufian sickle 
blades suggest that people were frequently harvesting moist unripe grain, a practice 
that would have avoided the shattering problem in order to maximize yields from 
wild cereals (Unger-Hamilton 1989, 1991; Anderson 1994). Unripe stalks are also easier 
to cut than fully ripe ones, although unripe wild grain can be more time-consuming 
than ripe grain to dehusk if it needs to be dried or roasted beforehand (Wright 1994). 
However, any Natufian combination of an unripe harvest plus consumption of all 
the grains harvested, rather than storing some for replanting next season, could never 
have led to domestication. Something else had to occur to encourage the process.

We may never know exactly how the process finally occurred in such an irreversible way, but three activities would certainly have helped it along. One was surely the 
adoption of sickle harvesting and thus selection for non-shattering, as noted above. 
Another would have been the planting of sickle-harvested grain in new areas away 
from wild stands. A third would have been delaying the harvest until the plants were 
partly or fully ripe, increasing the representation of grains from non-shattering ears.

Thus, Gordon Hillman (2000) has recently suggested that the Epipaleolithic inhabitants of Abu Hureyra at about 11,500 BC, prior to the Younger Dryas and in conditions of relatively high warmth and humidity, chose to harvest by beating wild 
cereals into baskets. Such would have led to no selection toward domestication. 
Then, during the Younger Dryas, the shrinkage of wild stands of cereals prompted 
the inhabitants to plant their wild rye. At the same time, some form of sickling or 
uprooting method of harvesting must have been adopted, at least by some families. 
Did they also at some point, perhaps deliberately, begin to cut off ripe ears for 
storage and replanting and leave any remaining unripe ears for later processing as 
food? We do not know. But somehow, the result at Abu Hureyra was a development 
of plump-grained domesticated rye by soon after 11,000 BC, strangely ephemeral at 
this time and seemingly unconnected directly with the much more massive appearance 
of domesticated cereals after 8500 BC. Many mysteries remain.

First Farmers: The Origins of Agricultural Societies by Peter Bellwood
    
    
    
    
    
  

  

The Archaeological Record in Southwest Asia in Broader 

Perspective

Where did systematic agriculture and associated villages originate? From a small area 
such as the central or northern Levant followed by expansion, or in several different 
early-cultivator environments linked by cultural contacts right through the Fertile 
Crescent, all at much the same time? What were the ultimate consequences of "fullon" Neolithic agriculture, particularly when linked to animal domestication, with 
truly massive settlement agglomerations eventually attaining up to 16 hectares in 
extent? We have, in the PPNB in particular, a manifestly unstable combination of 
powerfully developing human economies in fragile environments. There were consequences at that remote time, just as there are consequences (unpleasant ones) for 
the similar situation humanity finds itself in today.

To approach the questions asked above we need to examine the distributions 
of contemporary cultural variation within the Natufian and Pre-Pottery Neolithic 
cultural complexes in the Levant. We need also to expand the debate into nearby 
areas, such as Anatolia and western Iran, where related developments occurred.

Firstly, for the Natufian and its contemporaries, the archaeological record reveals a 
dense cluster of "Classic" Natufian sites in the southern and central Levant, concentrated in the Jordan Valley and the Mediterranean coastal hinterland (Figure 3.1). 
Related sites such as Mureybit and Abu Hureyra were located on the Middle Euphrates. These sites share sufficient material culture for us to suggest that their inhabitants shared a similar lifestyle, and similar stylistic traditions in their art, burial methods, 
architecture, and so forth. There are regional differences in the proportions of different classes of stone tools, but these are no more than one would expect given that 
the Natufian was spread over a range of both wooded and open environments, even 
into the desert fringes in the south and east. In archaeological terms, the Classic 
Natufian in Israel and Jordan rates as a fairly genuine "culture" (Bar-Yosef 1998b). 
Ofer Bar-Yosef and Anna Belfer-Cohen (1992:39) regard "the emergence of the Natufian 
from a background of Epi-Paleolithic hunter-gatherers as a revolutionary event which 
took place in a geographical, well-delineated Levantine `homeland'."

Contemporary sites of this period in Anatolia and Iran are not classifiable as Natufian 
in terms of microlithic technology, indeed those in Iran are separately classified as 
Zarzian in lithic terms. Few of these Anatolian or Iranian sites have yielded evidence 
for cereal or legume exploitation, and at present there is little evidence that their 
inhabitants were involved directly in the origins of agriculture.

The Pre-Pottery Neolithic A (ca. 9500 to 8500 Bc)

In the PPNA we find a wider spread of cultural relationships than occurred in the 
Natufian. Expansion occurred into northern Iraq and Anatolia, but it is very difficult 
to determine if this expansion originated in one region or if it developed contemporaneously over a much larger area.'Z The available C14 dates, with their inherent 
error ranges, overlap greatly in the 10,000 to 9000 BC time period, and there is also a radiocarbon calibration "plateau" in this time span which makes chronological precision currently impossible. But, however the PPNA evolved, it did so quickly.

The extent of the PPNA, as defined by the varying presences of certain marker stone 
tools (Figure 3.5) such as "projectile points" (El Khiam, Salibiya, Helwan, and Jordan 
valley variants), the small "Hagdud truncations," ground stone axes, and unretouched 
sickle blades, is considerably greater than that of the Natufian. It incorporates sites 
such as Mureybet, Abu Hureyra, and Jerf el Ahmar in northern Syria, and, with less 
certainty, Qermez Dere in northern Iraq." Jerf el Ahmar (9600 to 8500 Bc) has yielded 
some of the most interesting architecture recovered from the PPNA, comprising a 
sunken-floored circular community house surrounded by both circular and rectangular 
buildings. Circular houses, lime plastered floors, headless burials, female figurines, flint 
sickles, querns and hand stones, central Turkish obsidian, ground stone axes, notched 
projectile points, and a Natufian-derived flint industry all combine within the PPNA 
to produce a fairly tight unity, albeit with minor differences in expression if one 
compares sites as far apart as Jericho and Mureybet.

But where do the sites and complexes of Anatolia and the Zagros fit when compared 
to the PPNA pattern? The northern Iraqi site of Nemrik 9 (Kozlowski 1992, 1994) has 
many Levantine PPNA features (circular houses of cigar-shaped bricks, El Khiam 
points, for instance), but on the other hand it has aspects of lithic and ground stone 
technology claimed to relate to the Zarzian of the Zagros and to Hallan semi in 
eastern Anatolia. Interestingly, the presence of embedded projectile points in some 
Nemrik 9 burials suggests that ethnic coexistence in this region left something to be 
desired - perhaps this site lay in or close to a border zone between Levantine and 
Zagros spheres of influence. Sites located in the Zagros foothills in northeastern Iraq 
and western Iran at this time, such as M'lefaat, Karim Shahir, Zawi Chemi, Asiab, and 
Ganj Dareh level E, still remain poorly understood, but there seems to be unanimous 
agreement that they cannot be incorporated within the Levantine PPNA. Neither do 
any of these sites have unequivocal evidence for domesticated plants or animals 
during the PPNA or early PPNB time span. Current indications are that agriculture 
was introduced into these Zagros regions from the Levant (Hole 1998; Dollfus 1989; 
Kozlowski 1999).

It is uncertain if the same conclusion applies to southeastern Anatolia since einkorn 
might have been domesticated in this region, as discussed above. But during PPNA 
times, positive Levantine cultural links are few. Presumed-sedentary circular house 
settlements are reported from Hallan semi (ca. 10,000 Bc) and the basal level of cayonu 
(both in the Upper Tigris basin), in neither instance with positive evidence for agriculture (the former site has no cereal remains at all). Recent reports suggest that Hallan 
semi might have witnessed management of pigs during the Younger Dryas, contemporary with the later Natufian and the experiments in rye domestication at Abu 
Hureyra. If this conclusion is substantiated it could alter our perspectives on the 
course of animal domestication, at least in regions around the peripheries of the Levant.14

My inclination from present evidence is to regard the PPNA, with Susan Colledge 
et al. (2004), as a marker of the origins of agricultural communities within the Levant. 
There is no strong evidence to extend it beyond the boundaries shown in Figure 3.1. This implies that the contemporary sites in Iran and Anatolia were mainly "complex 
forager" settlements, possibly with some animal management,15 continuing alongside 
the PPNA with a lifestyle similar to that of the Natufian. The inhabitants of some 
of these sites might well have been harvesting wild cereals, but with the possible 
exception of einkorn there is no good evidence that they domesticated these cereals 
independently. As suggested by Jacques Cauvin, the full incorporation of the Turkish 
and Iranian wild cereal regions into the agricultural lifestyle seems to have occurred 
as a result of later PPNB expansion, again from a heartland located somewhere in 
the Levant.

First Farmers: The Origins of Agricultural Societies by Peter Bellwood
    
    
    
    
    
  

  

The Pre-Pottery Neolithic B (ca. 8500 to 7000 Bc)

We need first to bear in mind an important observation. The Southwest Asian 
environment is a fragile one, particularly when assaulted by human populations 
intent on population growth, woodland clearance, soil tillage, animal pasturing, and 
many other activities which can, in combination, lead toward land degradation, vegetation loss, salinization, soil erosion, and general resource decline.16 Southwest Asian 
PPN sites were rarely occupied continuously into historical times; even the largest 
such as Jericho and Abu Hureyra were abandoned. A major phase of environmental 
decline is attested for the later phases of the PPN in the Levant, fueled by both 
human activity and by a climatic trend toward aridity, and to this we return in due 
course. Common sense and history dictate that such episodes would always have 
given an impetus for a human population to seek new land. The alternative is intensification, or "agricultural involution" in the terminology of Clifford Geertz (1963), a 
course of action obviously taken many times in world history by civilizations and 
small-scale cultivators alike. But not all societies will automatically seek to intensify 
production locally to feed a growing population or avoid a resources shortfall, particularly if new land, previously undamaged by heavy-handed cultivators, is available 
within reach. This observation brings us to the PPNB and its expansive history.

Brian Hayden (1995) estimates that the PPNB population in the Levant was 16 
times that of the Natufian, yet the actual number of reported sites is much fewer 
than during the Natufian. This is because many PPNB sites are now virtually towns 
- some site areas cover up to 16 hectares (Figure 3.4), or about four times the size of 
the largest PPNA sites. Ian Kuijt (2000a) notes a 50-times increase in the sizes of the 
largest sites from late Natufian to late PPNB, over a period of about 2,500 years. 
Two-storey houses are attested from a number of PPNB sites in Jordan (Ain Ghazal, 
Basta, Baja), with stone walls in Baja surviving to a remarkable height of over 
4 meters (Gebel and Hermanson 1999). Some of the smaller sites were also fortified, 
at least in part, like late PPNB Tell Magzaliyah in northern Iraq (Bader 1993). 
Large town-like settlements, of course, mean that the inhabitants can afford to be 
settlement-endogamous if they wish - mates are not hard to find when a population 
of several thousand people live cheek by jowl. People can also be forced into defensive 
postures by high population densities and environmental instability, and this can lead 
to an efflorescence of tribalism and ethnicity. Thus we have two opposing trends in the PPNB, as in all successful Neolithic cultures - one toward expansion, the other 
toward regional differentiation. It is essential to remember this, otherwise we are 
forced toward choosing between two ridiculous polar hypotheses, one seeing the 
PPNB as totally monolithic, the other seeing it as a coincidental appearance of independently generated traits in many different areas. It was neither.

Like the PPNA, the PPNB of "classical" form existed only in the Levant. But the 
signs of an extension of some of its basic elements across larger parts of Southwest 
Asia are very compelling, especially in the typical late PPNB agglutinative rectangular house architecture and the powerful mixed farming economy, improved by the 
addition of hexaploid bread wheat. Certainly by the end of the PPNB, and probably 
well before, the full complement of major domestic animals - goat, sheep, cattle, and 
pig - had been added to the domesticated repertoire as wild species declined in 
numbers owing to intensive hunting (Legge and Rowley-Conwy 1987, 2000).

In terms of extent, the classic PPNB of the middle and late phases covers a larger 
area than the PPNA, probably much larger if one allows for future discoveries in the 
unsurveyed regions in Syria and Anatolia between the main distributions shown in 
Figure 3.1. It spread throughout the Levant, described as one cultural sphere" for 
the PPNB by Bar-Yosef and Belfer-Cohen (1989b, 1991:192), onward into northern 
Iraq, and with more local cultural input into southeastern and central Anatolia. The 
core origin region of the PPNB, if indeed there was a circumscribed origin, remains 
uncertain, although some scholars favor the northern Levant." Bar-Yosef and BelferCohen point out that many cultural traits typical of the PPNB seem to have a northto-south momentum in their chronological and geographical distributions. These 
include obsidian (all from Turkish sources), einkorn wheat and chickpeas (both of 
northern Levant/ Anatolian origin), domestic animals (especially sheep and goat, perhaps of northern Levant or Zagros origin), rectilinear architecture (marginally dated 
oldest by C14 in the northern Levant, in sites such as Mureybet and Jerf el Ahmar), 
and the gypsum-plaster antecedents of pottery termed "white wares." On the other 
hand, many outstanding aspects of PPNB culture are best known from the southern 
Levant, including the remarkable plastered and painted portrait skulls from Jericho 
and the slaked lime plaster "ancestor" figures built around frames of reeds and sticks 
found at Ain Ghazal in Jordan.

In terms of PPNB regionality, the picture differs slightly in terms of the artifact 
class being considered. For instance, PPNB sites in the Levant and southeastern 
Anatolia have fairly homogenous lithic technologies, focused on the production of 
large percussion blades from naviform cores to serve as blanks for tanged projectile 
points. Of these, the basally tanged "Byblos Point" seems to have been the most 
widespread and typical. Beyond the Levant, pressure-flaked blade cores are dominant, particularly in the Zagros and across northern Iran into Pakistan (Inizan and 
Lechevallier 1994; Quintero and Wilke 1995). The distributional boundary between 
the naviform and pressure-flaked cores seems to correlate with the division between 
the earlier Levantine PPNA cultures and those of the Zagros region, suggesting 
that the regionality observed for the PPNA time span was still continuing into the 
PPNB. Apart from the naviform cores and Byblos Points, the Turkish and middle Euphrates sites (caferhoyiik, Cayonii, A~iklihoyiik, Mureybit, and Jerf el Ahmar) also 
have similar types of incised stone pebbles or "plaques," suggesting an overall pattern 
of close cultural relationship. Plastered skulls and skull veneration derived from the 
PPNA tradition also occur from the southern Levant to as far away as Hacilar in 
central Anatolia, and various kinds of artificial cranial deformation seem to be present 
all over Southwest Asia (including Cyprus and the Zagros) in the PPN and Early 
Ceramic periods (Meiklejohn et al. 1992).

In terms of house plans there is much regional variation, with single-roomed 
houses at Ramad and Byblos, porched "megaron"-style houses in Jericho and Ain 
Ghazal, and, during the later PPNB, complex structures of small seemingly doorless 
cubicles in many sites around the edges of the distribution (e.g., Beidha and Basta in 
Jordan, Bouqras in Syria, at cayonti and Nevali Cori in Anatolia, and in early ceramic 
sites such as Umm Dabaghiyah and Yarim Tepe I in northern Iraq). It is this "doorless 
cubicle" architectural style that characterizes some of the earliest agricultural communities in regions far beyond the Levant, for instance in Ganj Dareh level D in Iran, 
Mehrgarh in Pakistan, and catalhoyuk in central Anatolia." Related "grill-plan" layouts of close-set parallel foundation walls, possibly to support floors within reed and 
post houses, are also reported from cayonu, Nevali Cori, and Basta, at opposite ends 
of the PPNB distribution (Ozdogan 1999). I believe these later PPNB architectural 
similarities to be important in indicating widespread cultural linkages. It is interesting 
also that Nissen et al. (1987) note that the gracile skulls of flexed burials excavated 
from Basta resemble skulls from cayoni.i. These two sites are close to the furthest 
north-south extremities of the PPNB distribution, 1,000 kilometers apart.

Potential community structures seem to illustrate aspects of local identity and 
style even more than ordinary houses since they would, of course, have been more 
popular vehicles for "heraldic" statements about group identity, affiliation, and ritual 
(Verhoeven 2002). Large numbers of such structures have been excavated in recent 
years, and all have their idiosyncrasies. As examples we have the large circular sunken 
"community houses" at Jerf el Ahmar and Mureybit (some of PPNA date); the mud 
brick rectangular "shrine" with an end niche at Jericho; circular and apsidal "shrines" 
at Ain Ghazal; the stone-walled rectangular "cult building" at Nevali Cori in Anatolia; 
and the large mud brick platform 10 by 7 meters in size and 60 centimeters high at 
PPNB Sabi Abyad II in northern Syria.

Most remarkably, a 9-hectare mountain sanctuary at Gobekli Tepe in eastern 
Anatolia (ca. 8300-7200 Bc) has a possible total of 20 (4 have been excavated) stonewalled circular enclosures 10 to 30 meters in diameter, with sunken floors, and inner 
wall surfaces set with radial arrangements of 10 massive T-shaped pillars up to 3 
meters high. Some of these pillars are decorated with relief carvings of animals. 
Each enclosure also had two high central T-shaped pillars, and one unfinished pillar 
found on the site would have stood over 6 meters high. These enclosures contain 
no primary habitation debris and were presumably used for community ceremonial 
activities of some kind - the whole complex was eventually deliberately buried under 
a transported layer of occupation soil 3 to 5 meters thick. Similar T-shaped pillars, in 
this case with carvings of humans, occur at Nevali Cori.

Communal burial in charnel houses was also a marked feature of the PPNB: we 
have the remarkable "skull building" or charnel house at cayonu, containing the 
jumbled remains of about 400 deceased members of the community placed in slabcovered stone cists across one end of the building; also a painted and plastered 
chamber with secondary burials at Baja in Jordan; a charnel room and other examples of collective burial at Abu Hureyra; and a remarkable series of human and wild 
cattle burials in pits sealed with lime plaster layers up to 3 tonnes in weight at Kfar 
HaHoresh near the Sea of Galilee. In the case of one pit at this last site, 50 human 
long bones appear to have been arranged in the shape of an aurochs or wild boar.'°

Intercommunity contact within the PPNB is highlighted by the developing obsidian 
trade, with obsidian from sources in both central and eastern Anatolia now very 
widespread. During the PPNA, only central Turkish obsidian appears to have reached 
the central and southern Levant, but eastern Turkish sources were added in the 
PPNB. Obsidian appears to have been generally absent in the Levant during the 
Natufian, or at least extremely rare.

As noted already for the PPNA, if we take present evidence at face value there is 
really no good evidence to suggest a spread of agricultural communities into the 
Zagros region of Iran much before 8000 BC, during the period of the PPNB in the 
Levant (Kozlowski 1999; Hole 2000; Dollfus 1989). By this time, sites such as Ganj 
Dareh, Tepe Guran, and Ali Kosh all have PPNB-like architecture and economies, 
although Ganj Dareh apparently lacked emmer wheat. All three sites have evidence 
for goat herding, and Ali Kosh has claimed evidence for sheep domestication. Ali 
Kosh is also located in the dry Deh Luran Plain of Khusistan where none of the major 
wild cereals would originally have grown. Agriculture clearly had to be introduced to 
this region, just as it had to be introduced to other regions beyond the agricultural 
homeland, such as Europe and Egypt.

Without going into more detail, we can see from the above that the PPNB has a 
general appearance of overall homogeneity in the Levant and adjacent regions of 
Anatolia and northern Iraq, but it also has many clear expressions of regionalism in 
style, especially in its later phases (the period, after all, lasted for over 1,500 years). 
The Zagros sites presumably belonged to other cultural configurations, despite the 
obvious existence of contact. Many authorities regard the PPNB as an "interaction 
sphere," without committing themselves too strongly on whether the interaction did 
or did not involve spreading populations."' Mehmet Ozdogan (1998:35), for instance, 
suggests: "What is most striking in the Near Eastern Neolithic is that it is a period 
of experimentation, carried out in the most orderly and organized way, as if experimenting in a lab; any change or innovation was, almost instantly, shared through 
all of the Near Eastern Neolithic region." We might argue for ever about how many 
ethnic groups constituted the PPNB, but one thing is clear - they communicated 
efficiently. Likewise, Jacques Cauvin regarded the PPNB as a unified spreading 
phenomenon with a northern Levant origin and a powerful religion based on the 
veneration of human and animal fertility. As it spread, so it replaced or incorporated 
the regional late hunter-gatherer and PPNA cultures into a relatively homogeneous 
whole, albeit with continuing foci of regional diversity.

We move now to some of the consequences of PPNB population growth, consequences that might give some insight into how the processes of farming spread 
beyond the Levant might have occurred.

First Farmers: The Origins of Agricultural Societies by Peter Bellwood
    
    
    
    
    
  

  

The Real Turning Point in the Neolithic Revolution

For most people, the concept of the Neolithic Revolution refers to the actual origin 
of agriculture with domesticated plants, this occurring in Southwest Asia in the late 
PPNA or early PPNB at around 9000-8500 BC. True, there was an economic revolution here, without which later civilizations could never have existed. But there is also 
another aspect to this revolution, and that concerns the spread of the agricultural 
lifestyle far beyond its homeland. After 8000 BC, a concatenation of events came 
together, literally to "lift the lid" off the PPN pressure cooker. Two of these event 
categories are of absolutely fundamental importance, these being regional episodes 
of resource shortfall caused by land degradation, and the increasing importance of 
animal domestication combined with an increasing dependence on legumes to serve 
as fodder (Miller 1992:5 1). Both trends reflected the results of inexorable human and 
animal population growth. This period witnessed the origins of specialized sheep and 
goat pastoralism, and it witnessed the laying down of the immediate proto-urban 
groundwork for the impressive Mesopotamian cultural sequence still to come; successive cultures such as Ubaid, Uruk, Susa, and the ultimate magnificence of third 
millennium BC Sumerian, Akkadian, and Elamite civilization. The Mesopotamian 
lowlands where these later civilizations developed were colonized by Early Ubaid 
irrigation farmers at about 6000 BC, with an economic and cultural tradition that 
owed a great deal to the PPNB.

All this growth in the size of the PPNB human population and in the complexity 
of the economy required to support such growth had, of course, a downside. This 
becomes apparent in considering developments between about 7000 and 6500 BC in 
the Levant. It is worth noting here that very few large PPNB sites in the Levant show 
continuous long-term occupation into the succeeding pottery-using Neolithic phase. 
Many were abandoned or shrank (sometimes only temporarily) at about the time 
that pottery was putting in a widespread appearance, during the seventh millennium 
BC. We see this clearly in the cases of Bouqras, Jericho, Beidha, and Abu Hureyra. 
The circumstances behind this seeming downturn of fortune have been researched in 
detail at the site of Ain Ghazal in the Jordan Valley (Kohler-Rollefson 1988; Rollefson 
and Kohl e r- Rollefson 1993). Here, there is evidence at about 6500 BC of cultural 
degradation of a fragile ecosystem, a trend perhaps exacerbated by a drying climate 
(Bar-Yosef 1996; Hassan 2000).21 Ain Ghazal grew from 5 to 10 hectares during the 
PPNB to reach a massive 13 hectares during the "PPNC" at around 6750 Bc. This 
development of peak size occurred as other sites in the region were also being 
abandoned (Ain Ghazal itself continued to be occupied into the Yarmukian Pottery 
Neolithic phase), suggesting that the site was briefly "booming," as many cities do 
today when the surrounding countryside loses some of its ability to support a large population. Large numbers of shaped clay tokens were in use in Ain Ghazal at this 
time - these are believed to be early precursors of accounting systems and even 
writing, so the complexities of managing the affairs of a large population may be 
evident, more than 3,000 years before writing was actually invented in Sumer.

However, during this phase of phenomenal growth at Ain Ghazal, the houses 
became further apart, room sizes became smaller, post-hole diameters decreased, 
and sickle blades and mortars decreased in numbers. Trees were cut for housing, 
cooking, and the firing of limestone to make plaster for covering floors and walls - 
the PPNB site of Yiftahel has a house measuring 7.5 by 4 meters, with a lime plastered 
floor estimated to weigh 7 tonnes (Garfinkel 1987). At Ain Ghazal, increases occurred 
in infant mortality, and in the importance of domesticated goats and the legume 
species which they probably liked as fodder. Many authorities see this trajectory as 
recording the local collapse of a cereal-based agricultural economy due to environmental degradation and extensive deforestation, with a consequent shift toward an 
increasingly pastoral economy and consequent human population decline or dispersal. 
Zarins (1990) has suggested that a major phase of dispersal by pastoralists occurred 
from the PPN Levant in the seventh millennium BC, extending into desert/oasis 
regions such as the Palmyra Basin and northern Arabia.

Similar hints of stress are reported from other sites. Beidha in southern Jordan was 
occupied into the PPNC and then abandoned, possibly to be replaced by the onehectare and very densely inhabited terraced pueblo-like settlement of Baja, a site 
which gives the impression of being a short-lived last-ditch attempt to keep settled 
life going in a region where its future was limited (Gebel and Bienert 1997; Gebel and 
Hermansen 1999). Abu Hureyra rose to an impressive 16 hectares in the Middle 
PPNB, then shrank back again to about half this size, with much less dense housing, 
by 7300 ac. Peter Akkermans records widespread site abandonment in the Balikh 
Valley in northern Syria during the seventh millennium BC, in the early pottery 
Neolithic, especially in drier regions. Even though Akkermans, like Ofer Bar-Yosef 
and Alan Simmons, favors a climate-change rather than a human-impact explanation 
in this regard, the results for human societies in general would have been similar 
(Akkermans 1993; Bar-Yosef 1996; Simmons 1997). On the other hand, abandonment 
was never universal and seems at present to be less marked in the northern Levant 
than elsewhere. The site of Tell Halula, for instance, seems not to have been abandoned at all between the PPNB and the subsequent Pottery Neolithic, despite some 
temporary shrinkage (Mandy Mottram, pers. comm.).

A combination of site abandonment in some regions, and a development of 
pastoral mobility around the edges of the continuing settled areas, would probably 
have encouraged two developments. These can be succinctly described as regional 
interaction and population dispersal, the two seemingly opposed factors which 
together led to the second, and major, stage of the Agricultural Revolution. After 
about 2,000 years of gestation amongst the early farming communities of southwestern Asia, the process of agricultural dispersal into northeastern Africa, Europe, 
central Asia, and the Indus region was about to take off, in earnest.
