Chapter 4 - Tracking the Spreads of Farming beyond the Fertile Crescent: Europe and Asia
========================================================================================

First Farmers: The Origins of Agricultural Societies by Peter Bellwood
    
    
    
    
    
  

  

Chapter 4

Tracking the Spreads of Farming 

beyond the Fertile Crescent: 

Europe and Asia

We move in this chapter to our first examination of the "full steam ahead" mode of 
agricultural dispersal. Focused within the two and a half millennia from 6500 to 4000 
BC, the farming system that developed in Southwest Asia spread over vast areas of 
the Old World - to Britain and Iberia in one direction; to Turkmenistan, the Altai 
Mountains, and Pakistan in the other; as well as to Egypt and North Africa. At the 
other end of Asia, East Asian agricultural systems were also on the move by this 
time, reaching toward Southeast Asia and eastern India.

For most regions of farming spread in both the Old and New Worlds, there has 
been much contentious debate about whether or not the archaeological record reveals 
some kind of cultural continuity from pre-farming into farming (Mesolithic to Neolithic 
in the Old World, Archaic to Formative in the Americas). Europe plays a very central 
role in these debates. In actuality, there are very few archaeological sites anywhere in 
the world, including Europe, that show unarguable, on-the-spot, continuity from a 
hunter-gatherer subsistence into farming, with no outside influence being present in 
material form. The main exceptions to this generalization, as we might expect, occur 
in regions believed to be independent homelands of agriculture (Figure 1.3). In most 
other areas, agricultural systems were variously acquired or imposed, sometimes by 
a combination of both processes.

Nevertheless, however the people of an area came to be agriculturalists, there would 
always have remained hunting-gathering populations who would have continued to 
exist, if allowed, for centuries or perhaps even millennia after agriculture began. The 
histories of European colonization in the Americas and Australia make this crystal 
clear, even through in these cases the hunters and gatherers were decimated by lethal 
diseases and territorial dispossession at rates many times greater than any which could 
conceivably have occurred during the early Neolithic. Agriculturalist dispersal does not 
automatically mean instant hunter-gatherer demise, and any hints of in situ cultural continuity in archaeological site records during transitions to agriculture need not 
automatically mean that indigenous adoption was the only, or even the major, process 
behind the change on a regional basis. Hunting/ gathering and agriculture can exist 
side by side very successfully for as long as stable relations exist between the foragers 
and the farmers, separately but in interaction.

Chapter 3 plotted the spread of early agricultural economies from the northern Levant into adjacent regions of Anatolia and Iran. It described the growth of 
the agricultural economy, the addition of domesticated animals, and the resulting, 
seemingly rather unhappy, human impact on some regions with fragile resources. It 
examined periods, especially the PPNB, during which archaeological cultures seem 
to have had a coherence beyond the merely parochial and to have been associated 
with high levels of geographical expansion. But the PPNB was only the beginning of 
a continent-wide process of farming dispersal in four major directions - to Europe, 
central Asia, the Indian subcontinent, and North Africa.

First Farmers: The Origins of Agricultural Societies by Peter Bellwood
    
    
    
    
    
  

  

The Spread of the Neolithic Economy through Europe

Because of its broad latitudinal extent and because it extended well beyond the 
northern limits of Neolithic agriculture, Europe (Figure 4.1) has become one of the 
major regions of debate in world prehistory with respect to the question of how 
agriculture spread. Was it mainly by hunter-gatherer adoption? Or, following the 
terminology used by Albert Ammerman and Luca Cavalli-Sforza (1984), was it mainly 
by a "wave of advance" of farmers? Evidence suggests that it probably spread by a 
mixture of both processes, with rapid farmer dispersals in some regions such as 
Greece, the Mediterranean coastline, the Danube Valley, and onward into Germany 
and the Low Countries, but much slower spreads with substantial Mesolithic population involvement or resistance in western Europe and around the rugged and/or 
colder Atlantic and Baltic coastlines.

A recent analysis of European earliest Neolithic radiocarbon dates by Gkiasta et al. 
(2003) shows quite clearly how Mesolithic cultures existed side by side with Neolithic 
cultures for several centuries in some parts of western Europe, especially southern 
and central France, Portugal, the British Isles and Ireland (see also Zilhao 2000; Perrin 
2003) (Figure 4.3). This is no more than one would expect given understanding of 
climatic factors and Mesolithic hunter-gatherer population densities at the time, the 
latter being most concentrated in maritime regions, but the details are nevertheless 
important to tease out since tempo of spread is an essential element in any overall 
and balanced interpretation of the whole situation.

Before moving into the details, six points require preliminary emphasis:

1. The Neolithic spread into Europe occurred, in the main, from western Anatolia. 
Connections across the Mediterranean with northwestern Africa and through 
the steppes north of the Black Sea were only of minor significance, the latter 
reflecting mainly expansion out of Europe rather than in during this time period 
(Telegin 1987; Yanushevich 1989).

2. With the marked exception of the Preceramic Neolithic of Cyprus, geographically closer to Asia than to Europe, and apart from a faint aceramic echo in Crete 
and mainland Greece, the Neolithic period in Europe was entirely ceramic, with 
a full complement of Southwest Asian cereals, legumes, and domestic animals. 
Genetic data indicate that European cattle descend from Western Asian rather 
than European wild stock (Troy et al. 2001), and the wild ancestors of sheep and 
goats were not native to Europe.

3. The spread of agriculture through Mediterranean and temperate Europe south 
of the Baltic, from the Aegean to the British Isles, spanned about 2,500 years, 
from 6500 to 4000 BC. Along the east-west axis there was a standstill of perhaps 
a millennium near the western edge of the Great Hungarian Plain (Sumegi and 
Kertesz 2001). Along the south-north axis, initial agricultural settlements in the 
Baltic region and Scandinavia occurred only after 3500 Bc, and in colder Boreal 
regions only as recently as AD 500 (Zvelebil 1996a, 1998; Taavitsainen et al. 1998).

4. Evidence for the spread of agriculture around the coastlines of the Mediterranean and the Atlantic is bedeviled by the fact that the sea surface only reached its 
present level at about 4000 BC, having risen from a level of minus 35 meters at 
about 8000 Be. Although postglacial isostatic uplift of the North Sea and Baltic 
regions has lessened the problem in the north, further south a large quantity of 
early Neolithic coastal archaeology is presumably drowned, to the detriment of 
detailed understanding. Barnett (1995), for instance, refers to an early Neolithic 
site off the coastline of Languedoc, now 5-6 meters below sea level.

5. Some of the debate about the transition from Mesolithic to Neolithic has been 
focused on caves and rock shelters, especially in the Mediterranean zone. A comparative perspective suggests that caves were far more likely to harbor surviving 
hunter-gatherers, users no doubt of gifted, borrowed, or looted farmer goods, 
than they were to harbor successful farmers. Many caves are far from good 
agricultural land by virtue of their karst geology, but often in prime hunting 
terrain. There can be no overall generalization here, but we would be wise to 
take care with caves and to examine their records bearing such factors in mind.

6. Virtually all authors who have written about the European Neolithic, whatever 
their interpretative persuasions, seem to agree that patterns of cultural diversity 
start off in low profile, in situations of widespread homogeneity, but become 
sharper and more localized as time goes by. In the words of Gordon Childe 
(1956:86):

If one studies in detail several closely allied Neolithic groups - on the Central European foss, for example - one notices a continual divergence, the 
multiplication of individual groups each differing from one another ever more 
pronouncedly ...

Cultural diversity across much of Europe in the Early Neolithic was considerably 
less than it was in either the later part of the preceding Mesolithic, or in the 
subsequent Late Neolithic.

First Farmers: The Origins of Agricultural Societies by Peter Bellwood
    
    
    
    
    
  

  

Southern and Mediterranean Europe

Cyprus, Turkey, and Greece

Agricultural dispersal into Cyprus occurred during the PPNB, perhaps even in the 
late PPNA, at about 8500 BC. The settlers presumably crossed the Mediterranean 
from the Syrian coast, although likely source regions in the northern Levant are now 
beneath the sea - existing sites such as Ras Shamra and Byblos in the modem coastal 
region are too young to represent direct sources. As Edgar Peltenberg et al. (2001:60) 
comment: "The Mediterranean [i.e., Cyprus] evidence, therefore, provides firmer 
evidence than was previously available from the mainland alone that migration played 
a significant role in the earliest spread of farming" (see also Colledge et al. 2004).

One of the first tasks of the new settlers in Cyprus seems to have been the hunting 
to extinction of a native and doubtless naive fauna of pygmy hippos.' They established several villages with a full Levantine PPNB material culture, including Byblos 
Points, naviform cores, glossed sickle blades, and Anatolian obsidian (Peltenberg 
et al. 2000, 2001; Knapp and Meskell 1997; Simmons 1998). They brought with them 
their crops - domesticated einkorn, emmer, and barley. Cattle, sheep, goat, pigs, and 
fallow deer (the latter presumably wild) also made the sea crossing, and animals were 
kept in a palisaded enclosure at the site of Shillourokambos. The most famous of the 
Neolithic villages of Cyprus is Khirokitia (Le Brun 1989) in the southern part of the 
island, where a village of dozens of stone-walled honeycomb-like circular houses, 
reminiscent of the Levantine PPNA, was founded about 7000 BC in a steep valley 
close to the sea. The Khirokitia houses are divided by a wall which probably reflected 
some kind of social/lineage division in the community.

Current opinion on the western Anatolian sequence also favors population incursion, in this case from central and southeastern Turkey, and somewhat later in time 
than Cyprus. Western Turkey, on current evidence, appears to have witnessed a 
cultural trajectory into the Neolithic during the early ceramic period. The site of 
Ilipinar on the Bosporus (6200-5500 Bc) has an initial phase of single-roomed houses 
built of mud slabs, followed by a phase with mud brick multi-roomed two-storied 
houses of central Anatolian type. The inhabitants had a fully agropastoral economy 
with pigs, cattle, and caprovines (goats and sheep), and made female figurines and 
a variety of chaff-tempered pottery. The excavator of Ilipinar, Jacob Roodenberg, 
derives this population from the Hacilar region of central Turkey, and specifically 
notes the close relationship between Ilipinar and the early Neolithic of the Balkans 
(Roodenberg 1999; Ozdogan 1997a, 1997b).

Further to the west, in Thrace, an exotic ceramic Neolithic tradition appeared in 
the site of Hop Cesme at about 6400 Bc, in association with stone-walled circular 
houses, a defensive wall, painted and monochrome pottery, and a large-blade tradition which does not descend from the local Epipaleolithic. Mehmet Ozdogan also 
traces the Hoca Cesme tradition to central Turkey, and notes that its pottery is 
related to that of some early Neolithic sites in the eastern Balkans, such as Karanovo 
I in Bulgaria.

The perspective from Greece matches that from western Anatolia quite smoothly, 
with the introduction of a Neolithic cultural tradition with both Anatolian and deeper 
"Near Eastern" features, as postulated by Ozdogan. Aceramic Neolithic occupation is 
attested in Stratum X at Knossos on Crete at about 7000 BC, with a full agropastoral 
complement of bread wheat, cattle, pigs, sheep, and goats. According to Cyprian 
Broodbank, this represents a fairly large-scale episode of maritime colonization, from 
an uncertain origin point, of an island that, like Cyprus, apparently had no prior 
inhabitants (Broodbank and Strasser 1991; Broodbank 1999). Together with the evidence from Cyprus, Knossos Stratum X suggests that the oldest dispersals westward 
from the Levant might have been by sea, rather than by the land route through 
western Turkey. Likewise, the Greek mainland itself has only a shadowy and very 
late Preceramic Neolithic, represented at Argissa in Thessaly and a few other sites. 
Otherwise, most mainland Greek Neolithic sites appear to postdate 6500 Bc, and 
contain pottery (Perles 2001).

Greece, in environmental terms, represents a direct westward extension of the 
Anatolian landmass. Like much of Turkey, it has limited agricultural land and a fairly 
scarce record of Mesolithic occupation, circumstances which would allow any 
incoming Neolithic population to move freely between the best pockets of fertile 
alluvial soil. This is exactly what we see in the record, if we pool the observations of 
several authorities.' Tjeerd van Andel and Curtis Runnels (1995) discuss the distribution of Neolithic sites in Thessaly, mostly on terrace fans next to active flood plains 
and close to cultivable raised levees. Like Andrew Sherratt (1980), they favor a saltatory 
movement of pioneer Neolithic societies, moving rapidly from one circumscribed 
environment to another (Figure 4.2). Thessaly is quite rich in such alluvial environments and during the Early Neolithic supported a remarkable density of sites averaging 2.5 hectares in size, located about 2.7 kilometers apart on average and heavily 
dependent on agricultural production (Perles 1999).

Figure 4.2 The saltatory Neolithic colonization in Greece, moving from fertile across 
infertile regions to new farmlands. From van Andel and Runnels 1995.

Jean-Paul Demoule (1993) and Catherine Perles (2001) both see the Greek Neolithic 
economy as heavily agropastoral from the start, with very little hunting and no lithic 
continuity from the Mesolithic. Greek Early Neolithic painted pottery is homogeneous 
(Vitelli 1995), and closely paralleled in the early Hoca Cesme pottery of Thrace, as 
well as in the Proto-Sesklo, Starcevo, and Karanovo assemblages of the southern 
Balkans (ca. 6100 ac) (Figure 4.1). Over time it developed greater regional expressions, 
particularly after 5300 BC. As far as specific parallels with the Anatolian Neolithic are 
concerned, we can point to a number of items which appear in the earliest Greek 
Neolithic sites: female figurines, marble bracelets, painted pottery with no very clear 
"primitive" phase, earplugs of stone or clay, clay stamp seals, flexed burials under house 
floors, wattle and daub associated with mud brick and timber-framed house construction techniques, and the build-up of tells (Perles 2001:52-56). Greek and Balkan 
Neolithic houses tend to be single-roomed and separate, as we see in some contemporary Neolithic sites in the northern Levant (Tell Ramad and Byblos, for instance).

An important perspective on the introduction of the agricultural economy into 
Greece is provided by Franchthi Cave in the Argolid. Here, Mesolithic populations 
utilized wild forms of oats, lentils, pistacchio, almond, and barley. Then, domesticated 
emmer, barley and lentils, with domesticated sheep, goats, and pigs, appeared fairly 
suddenly in the sequence at about 6900 BC, after a period of virtual abandonment of 
the site. Julie Hansen (1991, 1992) sees this appearance as a result of introduction 
from Anatolia. What role the local Mesolithic people played in all of this is unclear, 
but a cave situation such as Franchthi is one place where we might expect some 
degree of continuity. However, in her recent survey of the Greek early Neolithic, 
Catherine Perles (2001, with Colledge et al. 2004) favors colonization by many groups 
crossing the Aegean from Anatolia, rather than continuity from a faint preceding 
Mesolithic phase. She notes (2001:44) that Greece has only 12 recorded Mesolithic 
sites, as opposed to between 250 and 300 Neolithic sites.

As in the Levant, so too in Greece there was perhaps an ultimate price to pay 
for the early Neolithic episode of colonization and population growth. Soil erosion 
became evident about 500-1,000 years after the beginnings of the Greek Neolithic in 
parts of Thessaly and the Peloponnese (van Andel et al. 1990). Neolithic agriculture 
impacted heavily on the slopes around the Argive Plain, site of the future Bronze Age 
citadel of Mycenae:

This expansion of human activity triggered an environmental catastrophe that altered 
the landscape forever ... It appears that in a very short period massive erosion stripped 
the soil from the hills above Berbati and Limnes, leaving behind bare rock where the 
Neolithic farmers [had] grazed their flocks and had their fields. The soil and debris 
flowed out into the Argive Plain to the south, depositing as much as 20 feet of alluvium 
over a large area. (Wells et al. 1993:56)

True, the later civilization of Mycenae might have waxed rich on the agricultural 
produce of all these anthropogenic alluvial lowlands, as did many island cultures in 
the Pacific whose ancestors also caused similar soil erosion (Spriggs 1997b). But the fact remains that the immediate impact might have been a little unsettling, at least 
for a while. According to van Andel and Runnels (1995:497), the settlement history 
of eastern Thessaly underwent a decline in the late Neolithic, with few new settlements founded and many abandoned. One might legitimately wonder about the 
consequences of such developments as a trigger for ensuing population dispersal.

First Farmers: The Origins of Agricultural Societies by Peter Bellwood
    
    
    
    
    
  

  

The Balkans

The answer to this question was probably two-pronged. In the first direction, moving 
northward, early Balkan Neolithic cultures closely related to those of Anatolia and 
northern Greece are represented by the Proto-Sesklo culture of Macedonia, the 
Starcevo culture of parts of the former Yugoslavia, the Karanovo I of Bulgaria and 
Thrace, and the Koros of Hungary. Perles (2001:304) believes that the earliest Balkan 
Neolithic populations arrived from Anatolia via Thrace, rather than from Greece itself. 
Whatever the exact origins, the full agropastoral economy with domesticated cattle 
traveled too, with the addition of broomcorn millet, a cereal not native to Southwest 
Asia which must, presumably, have been introduced from the steppes of the Ukraine 
or central Asia (Dennell 1992; Zohary and Hopf 2000). The Balkan Neolithic cultures 
continued the same general PPNB/Anatolian-related elements as those in Greece, 
including, in the southern Balkans, tell-like settlements of wattle and daub houses, a 
form of wall construction better suited to wetter climates than mud brick.

The local Mesolithic populations were not entirely unaffected by all of this (see the 
range of views in Kertesz and Makkay 2001), and chronological overlap with them 
appears to be documented (albeit with controversy) at the site of Lepenski Vir in 
the Iron Gates region of the middle Danube, where acculturated descendants of a 
Mesolithic population are claimed to have continued in occupation until possibly 
4400 BC. A rather piecemeal impact of the Neolithic in the Balkans is suggested by 
palynological evidence, indicating that forest clearance only registered on a large 
scale at about 4000 BC (Willis and Bennett 1994).

The northwestward spread of the Balkan style of Neolithic, in form of the Koros 
culture of Hungary, evidently ran out of steam for about a millennium toward the 
western limits of the Great Hungarian Plain, owing perhaps to variations in soil conditions, climate, and topography (Sumegi and Kertesz 2001). But by about 5400 BC, 
after a likely episode of cultural and perhaps biological reformulation, there emerged 
the temperate climate phenomenon of remarkable colonizing power known to archaeologists as the Linear Pottery Culture, or Danubian, to which we return below.

The Mediterranean

In the second direction of expansion into Europe, agricultural populations had also 
begun to move along the northern Mediterranean coastline by at least 6000 Bc; the 
earliest pottery in Albania and Italy is related to that of the Starcevo culture in the 
southern Balkans. On the Tavoliere Plain in southeastern Italy, commencing about 
6200 BC, there is a remarkable concentration in an area of 70 by 50 kilometers of about 500 ditched settlement enclosures up to 30 hectares in size, some with multiple 
outer ditches and internal compounds (Malone 2003). Ruth Whitehouse (1987) notes 
that there is no evidence for Mesolithic continuity here, but neither are there obvious 
signs of direct origin in the tell settlements of Greece or the Levant. What we appear 
to have is an adaptation to continuously unfolding new landscapes as the agricultural 
complex and its associated material culture spread westward. Tells were replaced by 
more ephemeral villages as people moved to regions of more widespread agricultural 
potential than obtained in the Levant, Anatolia, or Greece,' allowing timber to replace 
mud bricks for construction and a more frequent foundation of new settlements, 
instead of continuous occupation of single localities.

Beyond Italy we see the continuing spread of Neolithic cultures, characterized 
by so-called Cardial (shell-impressed) pottery, along the northern coastline of the 
Mediterranean to reach southern France, Iberia, Malta, and the nearby coast of North 
Africa between 5800 and 5400 BC (Rowley-Conwy 1995; Zilhao 1993, 2001). According to Joao Zilhao, the complex traveled via maritime colonization focusing on 
regions not densely settled by Mesolithic hunters, forming a sharp break with the 
preceding Mesolithic in most regions, despite some hints of overlap in certain marginally located limestone caves. But of course, Mesolithic populations were not all 
absent-mindedly looking the other way while farming blossomed behind their backs. 
In Portugal, the end of the line for this particular episode of Neolithic dispersal and 
also a good location for maritime hunter-gatherers, Mesolithic populations appear to 
have overlapped for at least 1,000 years with Neolithic farmers (Figure 4.3). In such a 
circumstance it is not surprising that some fairly strong debate has emerged recently 
on the question of Mesolithic continuity into the Neolithic in Iberia, with skeletal 
evidence from Portugal taking centre stage.'

First Farmers: The Origins of Agricultural Societies by Peter Bellwood
    
    
    
    
    
  

  

Temperate and Northern Europe

After 5400 BC, at roughly the same time that farming was spreading westward along 
the Mediterranean coastline, pioneer farming populations spread quite rapidly, following a 600-year standstill on the western edge of the Hungarian Plain, up the 
Danube Valley, and through Europe north of the Alps to as far as the Rhineland and 
the Paris Basin. The approaches to the northern European coastline brought another 
marked slowing of the rate of spread, and a marked increase in the potential evidence 
for Mesolithic population incorporation into the farming communities. Agriculture 
probably did not spread into Latvia and much of Scandinavia until after 3500 BC, or 
into Finland until well into the Bronze Age.

An interesting economic perspective on the two-pronged spread of Neolithic societies through Europe is given by archaeobotanist Ursula Maier (1996). The economy 
which spread initially through the Balkans, up the Danube and into temperate Europe 
north of the Alps, was dominated by hulled emmer and einkorn wheats. However, 
the wheats which spread along the northern Mediterranean were all of the naked 
variety, probably tetraploids. The technicalities here suggest that the agricultural colonization of Europe involved not only two axes of movement, but also two 
different cereal complexes, both eventually meeting west and north of the Alps.'

First Farmers: The Origins of Agricultural Societies by Peter Bellwood
    
    
    
    
    
  

  

The Danubians and the northern Mesolithic

The northerly and westerly expansion of pioneer farmer communities from the Hungarian Plain through the former Czechoslovakia, Austria, Poland, Germany, and the 
Low Countries, but stopping short of extension on to the alluvial coastal plain of 
northern Europe, belongs to one of the most dramatic episodes of cultural replacement in European prehistory. After 5400 BC, Linear Pottery Culture (otherwise termed 
Danubian, Linear Bandkeramik, or simply LBK) populations with their characteristic 
timber longhouse settlements and incised pottery spread through the fertile loesslands, 
favoring floodplain-edge situations for their permanent villages, with an economy 
focused on small clearings in the forest where they raised hulled emmer and einkorn 
wheat, broomcorn millet, cattle, sheep, goats, and pigs.' LBK origins can be located 
at the southeastern end of the distribution (Figure 4.1), and the spread was very rapid 
- perhaps 200 years from Slovenia and Poland to the Paris Basin. There is very little 
evidence for interaction with Mesolithic communities, except in the peripheral westerly and northerly parts of the region. Large-blade tools, including sickles, replaced 
the bladelets and burins of the local Mesolithic, although Gronenborn (1999) suggests 
that there was some lithic continuity in blade manufacture.

The LBK reflects remarkable homogeneity in pottery decoration and longhouse 
construction, a homogeneity soon to break up with the settling-down process and 
the inevitable decay of long-distance colonizer networks. LBK settlements reveal 
high densities in some areas, with villages (Figure 4.4) located as little as one kilometer 
apart, but with few sites in other areas, suggesting as in Greece and Iberia that early 
farmers were quite selective in their choice of territory and prepared to move long 
distances if necessary. The longhouses, as in parts of ethnographic Borneo, might 
have reflected non-lineage societies in which early landownership patterns were fluid 
- a pattern within which people could move frequently from one village or longhouse 
to another, as with the remarkably expansive Than of western Borneo in the 19th 
century. Such a society can be characterized as oriented toward the acquisition of 
labor rather than land, at least in the initial phase of territorial expansion into previously unfarmed terrain. Longhouses thus correlate from this perspective with a society 
in pioneer mode, where individual families need mobility. Such mobility has recently 
been demonstrated from a study of strontium isotopes in the teeth and bones of 
Rhineland LBK people, indicating that many people spent their childhoods in places 
with different environmental chemistries from those where their bones were finally 
laid to rest (Price et al. 2001).

North of the LBK distribution, however, the pattern of agricultural spread differed 
markedly. Entrenched Mesolithic populations located on the North European alluvial 
plain and around the Baltic and North Sea coastlines, together with the less favorable 
soil and climatic conditions, held up the spread of agriculture in a major way. The 
details are complex and differ from place to place; this lack of homogeneity of course being a sure sign in itself that Neolithic settlers did not just spread in a vacuum. But 
before we look at some aspects of this complexity, let us consider a quotation about 
this interesting situation of hunter-farmer "confrontation":

it seems to me important, first to realize that we have here a situation that has no good 
modem analogy. We are studying the confrontation of stone-technology hoe cultivators, 
and colonist-settlers, with broad spectrum hunter-gatherers with presumably restricted 
mobility, all this in an unspoiled temperate environment with full opportunities for all 
communities involved to select optimal site locations in their perception. Both populations, the colonists and the natives, had widely different cultural roots. Those of the 
Bandkeramik are to be traced to southeastern Europe and ultimately to the Near 
East ... The "natives", in contrast, had their roots far back in the Late Palaeolithic of 
northern Europe ... My point is that differences in mentality can explain the lack of 
adoption of Neolithic elements [by the Mesolithic populations] in the early centuries 
of contact. Fundamentally different attitudes had to be bridged. This implies that both 
culture complexes gradually had to transform in the other's direction. (Kooijmans 
1993:137)

It is possible to make further observations on the nature of this Mesolithic-Neolithic 
interface in northern Europe. The edges of the LBK distribution in the Low Countries were marked by the construction of numerous longhouse settlements fortified 
by deep ditches and timber palisades, possibly reflecting defense against Mesolithic 
communities, although other kinds of within-LBK instability due to population growth 
(Sherman 2002:247-251) clearly cannot be ruled out. Lawrence Keeley refers to a 
no-man's-land along the frontier between Mesolithic and LBK sites in Belgium (Figure 4.5) and to a massacre of 34 members of an LBK population at Talheim in 
Germany. He also suggests that many of the LBK stone axes found in Mesolithic 
sites were used as weapons of war and points out (Keeley 1997:309) that "whatever 
interactions there were between these two groups, they were at best chilly and at 
worst violent."

Relevant here for the rather long and drawn-out episodes of hunter-farmer interaction on the northern fringes of Europe is the idea that domesticated crops and 
animals will be adopted by hunter-gatherers by means of passing through three 
successive phases, termed by Marek Zvelebil and Peter Rowley-Conwy (1986; Zvelebil 
1998) the availability, substitution, and consolidation phases. The availability phase could 
have been quite long. For instance, the Ertebelle hunter-fishers of the coastlines of 
Denmark and northern Germany maintained a frontier with farmers to the south 
between about 4800 and 4000 BC, after which agriculture finally spread rapidly into 
the region in the form of the TRB (Funnel Beaker) culture.' Ertebelle sites have no 
clear signs of any agricultural products, apart from occasional goat bones, indicating 
that they probably did not trade regularly for produce from farmers (unlike many 
recent "niche" hunter-gatherers - see chapter 2). They did adopt pottery-making at 
about 4500 Bc, and imported some LBK antler and stone adzes. So in this case we 
witness long-term contact without agricultural adoption, prior to the ultimate entry 
of Ertebolle descendants into the agricultural TRB lifestyle.

Figure 4.5 The non-overlapping distributions of Mesolithic and LBK sites in a section of 
the Meuse Valley in Belgium, in the vicinity of Liege and Maastricht. After Keeley and 
Cahen 1989. The LBK sites are restricted to loess soils and are ringed by Mesolithic sites. 
Note the separation to the north between the nearest Mesolithic and Neolithic settlements; 
such settlements are only in proximity where the Meuse River intervenes.

First Farmers: The Origins of Agricultural Societies by Peter Bellwood
    
    
    
    
    
  

  

The TRB and the Baltic

The TRB, a derivation from the earlier LBK, spread across the northern coastal plain 
of Europe starting about 4500 Bc and replaced or incorporated the Mesolithic Ertebelle 
culture. It reflects both a high level of early homogeneity and a fairly clear derivation 
from the Lengyel variant of the later LBK. As with the LBK, this early homogeneity 
hints strongly at dispersal from a source region, rather than piecemeal origin amongst 
native Mesolithic groups. Of course, there are sometimes traces of Mesolithic continuity within the TRB trajectory, emphasized by many authors." Bergljot Solberg 
(1989), however, favors a sharp replacement of the Ertebelle by the TRB in Denmark, 
with only a faint degree of continuity (see also Skak-Nielson 2003; Raemakers 2003). 
Peter Rowley-Conwy (1999) also comments on the sharpness of the change in dietary 
terms, despite middle Neolithic switches in some regions to hunting and gathering 
(such switches are common in agricultural boundary zones - see chapter 2). It is clear 
that the process of becoming Neolithic in northern Europe was essentially driven by 
an LBK-TRB cultural phylogeny rather than by a native Mesolithic one, regardless of 
how many "native" hunter-gatherers there might have been around who were willing 
or allowed to join the farmer villages.

Another interesting region of long-term agricultural availability, here more clearly 
associated with actual substitution (i.e., eventual agricultural adoption by Mesolithic 
communities), was located around the eastern shoreline of the Baltic (Zvelebil 1998). 
Rimute Rimantiene (1992) proposes a long "Early Neolithic" phase between 5500 and 
3400 Bc, associated with the use of pottery but no agriculture,9 followed by a Middle 
Neolithic between 3400 and 2800 BC, when agriculture, with foxtail and broomcorn 
millet, emmer, and domesticated animals, was finally adopted. The resulting Mesolithicderived economic amalgam was, in turn, overtaken by incoming Corded Ware farmers 
during the late Neolithic (2800 to 2000 BC).

Both the Ertebelle and the Baltic examples raise an interesting question. We see, on 
the agricultural fringes, with some examples carrying more conviction than others, 
situations whereby native Mesolithic populations adopted aspects of a Neolithic lifestyle, with or without agriculture, and eventually blended, or simply disappeared, 
into the "full Neolithic" and Bronze Age cultural records which ensued. So, we may 
ask if the full Neolithic cultures of northern Europe beyond the LBK heartland existed 
entirely because Mesolithic populations adopted agriculture, or did the real impetus 
behind the process lie with expanding and land-hungry farmers moving mainly from 
the south and east? This is one of those everlasting questions that seem to torment 
archaeologists all over Europe. Just observing that some Mesolithic populations probably became incorporated into a Neolithic cultural landscape tells us nothing very 
useful at all. What we want to know is what really drove the Neolithic expansion, a 
question for which the activities of those Mesolithic hunters who happened to be 
somewhere in the vicinity of the action may not have been terribly relevant.

First Farmers: The Origins of Agricultural Societies by Peter Bellwood
    
    
    
    
    
  

  

The British Isles

A similar debate exists for the British Isles. Lowland Britain ("England") is a fertile 
region with a warm maritime climate which would have been attractive to agriculturalists from the start, just as were the lowlands of Europe, apart from the sandy 
and rather infertile North European Plain. Mesolithic adoption of agriculture is more 
likely in the fastnesses of Scotland, Wales, and Ireland, where Iron Age inhabitants 
4,000 years later were much more successful in resisting the Roman and the later 
Anglo-Saxon onslaughts than their lowland eastern contemporaries. Nevertheless, 
most archaeologists today favor a purely Mesolithic adoption of a continental agricultural economy into the British Isles. Douglas Price (1987:282) has suggested that "the 
`Neolithic revolution' in Britain was an inside job," thus relegating any arrival of a 
farmer population from the continent as of minimal significance.

However, the transition from Mesolithic to Neolithic in Britain and Ireland was 
quite sharp and decisive, just as on the continent. No British Mesolithic sites have 
ever been reported to have evolved Neolithic economies or material cultures entirely 
from internal resources. New data on large LBK-like timber houses, field systems, 
and some fairly impressive cereal inventories in British Neolithic sites indicate that 
many of the inhabitants were serious farmers with continental cultural traditions." 
Indeed, given the negative perspective on adopting agriculture at a distance given in chapter 2, even if the English Channel is only 33 kilometers wide, a totally Mesolithic 
engine of adoption seems most unlikely.

The debate over Mesolithic adoption of farming often extends to considerations of 
the earthen burial mounds and megalithic monuments characteristic of many western 
European Early Neolithic cultures from about 4600 BC onward. These are seen by 
many as reflectors in part of a Mesolithic ideological input into a Neolithic landscape, 
even though there seems no unequivocal evidence to trace them precisely to a 
Mesolithic source. Chris Scarre (1992) and Andrew Sherratt (1997a) adopt a middle 
course, regarding the early long burial mounds with timber chambers as reflecting a 
central European Neolithic, perhaps LBK, ultimate origin, with the very frequent 
expressions of megalithicism and circularity in monument design (especially passage 
graves) as being of native Mesolithic origin (Figure 4.6). As Sherratt (1997a:336-367) 
has recently expressed the situation, clearly wishing to maintain the best of both 
worlds: "The Neolithic cultures of western and northern Europe ... created a unique 
synthesis of an ultimately Near Eastern form of social organization ... and an indigenous population with its own forms of culture and subsistence base."

First Farmers: The Origins of Agricultural Societies by Peter Bellwood
    
    
    
    
    
  

  

Hunters and farmers in prehistoric Europe

Thinking in a general way, we may ask what range of situations might have given rise 
to some perceived degree of continuity from Mesolithic to Neolithic in regions not 
suspected to have witnessed independent origins of agriculture. Mesolithic adoption 
of agriculture in isolation is highly unlikely, at least from the perspective taken in this 
book, unless the agriculture can be shown to have been generated locally, as in Southwest Asia. But there are many intermediate possibilities. One is suggested for formerly 
Mesolithic populations by Ian Armit and Bill Finlayson (1992): "Whether actual economic practices themselves or whether only material symbols originally associated 
with agricultural economies were initially adopted, archaeologically these people 
would become Neolithic." In other words, hunters can adopt outsider artifacts, as 
have many in the recent ethnographic record, without actually adopting agriculture 
itself. They can thus appear to be Neolithic without being so in economic reality.

R. E. Donahue and colleagues (1992) give a good example of this from Tuscany, 
in which a Mesolithic cave-dwelling population acquired Neolithic pottery. Milutin 
Garasanin and Ivana Radovanovic (2001) give another example, this time of a Neolithic 
pot in a "Mesolithic" house in Lepenski Vir (Danube Basin). As noted above, the late 
hunter-gatherers of the North Sea and Baltic coastlines also acquired farmer goods 
such as polished axes. Some late Mesolithic sites in the Netherlands contain cereal 
remains, presumed traded in rather than locally cultivated. The archaeological record 
of the late Mesolithic in Europe must contain many more examples of this type, often 
difficult to recognize if the transition to agriculture occurred rapidly. Such situations 
carry no necessary implications for a unilateral Mesolithic adoption of agriculture.

At the opposite end of the spectrum, farmers who inhabit game-rich agricultural 
frontiers can switch temporarily to hunting and almost lose their agricultural heritage, becoming virtual hunters and gatherers again, as did many early Polynesian populations in the Pacific Islands." Admittedly, the Pacific islands east of the Solomons 
had no Mesolithic hunters - the first farmers found them pristine and well stocked 
with wild avifaunas. But clearly it is possible for frontier Neolithic populations to 
masquerade as Mesolithic hunters, a circumstance noted for the earliest Neolithic in 
central Europe by John Alexander (1978). Marek Zvelebil (1989) has also noted that 
many Neolithic sites in Europe do not appear to have actual evidence for agriculture, 
perhaps reflecting temporary shifts into foraging (although this could as well reflect 
poor preservation of organic remains).

Figure 4.6 The genesis of megalithic monuments from interaction between the LBK 
farming tradition and the Mesolithic "round-structure tradition" in northwestern Europe, 
mid-sixth to third millennia ac, according to Andrew Sherratt 1997a.

There can also be side-by-side interdigitated coexistence of hunters and farmers for 
long periods, a situation not to be confused with the long-term and rather hostile 
hunter-farmer frontier suggested by Keeley for Belgium during the LBK (above). As in many ethnographic situations, hunters and farmers can exchange and coexist in a 
mosaic of neighboring territories. Susan Gregg (1988) favors such a scenario for LBK 
farmers and their presumed Mesolithic contemporaries in southern Germany. As long 
as there are niches, hunters can of course survive for millennia amongst farmers, but 
only if the conditions are right.

First Farmers: The Origins of Agricultural Societies by Peter Bellwood
    
    
    
    
    
  

  

Agricultural Dispersals from Southwest Asia to the East

Central Asia

The agricultural movement that gave rise to the Zagrosian agricultural Neolithic by 
about 7500 BC continued on to reach Pakistan, the Caucasus, and Turkmenistan in 
central Asia during the seventh millennium BC. The spread to Pakistan probably 
occurred through northern Iran, rather than through the desert core of the Iranian 
Plateau, but current lack of information from northern Iran and Afghanistan makes 
further speculation rather difficult. However, the remarkable site of Mehrgarh in 
Baluchistan, on the Kachi alluvial plain about 150 kilometers southeast of Quetta, has 
a Preceramic Neolithic sequence through about 10 meters of archaeological deposit. 
Baluchistan lies toward the eastern limit of the winter rainfall zone and Mehrgarh 
itself provides a remarkable beacon-like outpost, close to the eastern limits of Fertile 
Crescent Neolithic expansion.

The foundation of Mehrgarh probably occurred a little before 7000 BC. The site has 
mud brick constructions of small rectangular doorless rooms arranged in rows, like 
those of some PPNB settlements. The stone tools are dominated by microlithic 
forms such as trapezes and lunates, similar to Epipaleolithic industries such as the 
Natufian and Zarzian, the latter perhaps indicating the most likely source of the 
tradition. Bitumen-hafted glossed sickle blades indicate cereal harvesting, and grain 
impressions in mud bricks indicate that a naked (i.e., domesticated) form of 6-row 
barley was the dominant crop. Hulled emmer and einkorn, 2-row barley, possibly 
durum or bread wheat, and dates were also present. In the lower levels there were 
no domesticated animals, but sheep and goats were domesticated toward the end of 
the Preceramic phase, together with the native Indian humped bovid (Bos indicus) 
that rapidly came to dominate the animal economy. Water buffalo bones occur as 
well, but it is unclear if this animal, so fundamental to the rice-farming economy of 
later South and Southeast Asia, was also domesticated in Preceramic Mehrgarh. Female 
figurines are of generalized Middle Eastern type.'

Although there have been suggestions that Mehrgarh represents a local independent generation of a Neolithic economy, this is really stretching the evidence rather 
far. Zebu cattle (Bos indicus) were presumably domesticated locally, and possibly even 
goats (MacHugh and Bradley 2001), but everything about the site suggests a cultural 
origin further to the west. Local domestication of a plant or animal need not mean a 
totally independent generation of an agricultural economy. Perhaps we have here, as so often, a combination of a cultural spread assimilating to some degree a "native" 
tradition.

The appearance of the first agricultural communities in Turkmenistan, east of 
the Caspian Sea, occurred somewhat later than at Mehrgarh. The Neolithic of 
Turkmenistan had pottery from the beginning, with the key site of Jeitun being 
founded around 6000 BC. Jeitun lies in a region which would have required irrigation 
to make agriculture successful, hence perhaps its relative lateness and seeming 
marginality on the northeastern edge of the Middle Eastern early agricultural sphere. 
The village covered about 0.4 hectares, with one-roomed square houses built of clay 
bricks with plastered floors and grain bins. Domestic sheep and goats were present 
from the start, together with einkorn and barley and a possible irrigation ditch. The 
Jeitun painted pottery seems related to that of the site of Jarmo in Iraqi Kurdistan, 
and it is probably to this region or northern Iran that the Jeitun culture will ultimately 
be traced. Here, as at Mehrgarh, the Middle Eastern economy was required to come 
to grips with its ecological boundaries, in this case on the fringes of the central Asian 
and zone (Harris et al. 1996; Harris 1998b).

Farming probably reached the Caucasus by about 6500 BC, and large numbers of 
Neolithic sites are reported from the eastern hinterlands of the Black Sea, on the 
Kura and Araxes riverine plains and close to some of the other small rivers that flow 
into the Caspian. According to Karine Kushnareva (1997), the oldest Neolithic sites 
have pottery and a full complement of domestic animals and plants, but she also 
notes continuity of Mesolithic technology in some of the remoter regions. As we will 
see, this is in accord with the linguistic situation in the Caucasus; an incoming farming economy was spread by farmers moving in from the south, but it was also clearly 
adopted to some degree by native populations whose languages survive in descendant form to the present.

To the north of about latitude 36°, a belt of rather forbidding desert extends east 
of the Caspian, through the Tian Shan ranges, and into the Taklimakan and Gobi 
desert regions of China and Mongolia. Early farmers did not penetrate these desert 
regions as far as we know, at least not until horse riding and the use of bronze 
allowed Andronovo pastoralists to spread through vast regions during the second 
millennium BC, as far to the east as the Altai and Tian Shan (Dergachev 1989). However, the grassland steppes to the north of these deserts, together with the belt of 
forest-steppe further north again, did witness a spread of mainly caprovine pastoralists 
with some cereal production after 5000 BC. The western steppes run from the mouth 
of the Danube, around the northern sides of the Black and Caspian Seas (Figure 4.1), 
and then fade eastward at the feet of the Altai and Sayan Mountains, virtually in the 
exact center of Asia. They then commence again in Mongolia. As far as the western 
steppes are concerned, the Kelteminar, Mariupol, Samara, and Botai complexes were 
all cultures of westerly derivation in the period down to 3500 BC, with Botai being the 
most easterly and reaching a little beyond the Urals. The succeeding Afanasievo 
culture reached the Altai by 2500 BC.

The more westerly of these groups in the vicinity of the Black Sea grew cereals 
such as emmer, einkorn, barley, common millet (Panicum miliaceum), and foxtail millet (Setaria italica), as well as herding sheep, goats, and occasional cattle (the latter 
perhaps used for traction in later prehistoric periods). To the east of the Urals, it is 
unlikely that cereal production would ever have been a very viable activity, at least 
not prior to the Bronze Age, and the early emphasis seems to have been mainly 
pastoralist. Horses were hunted initially, and the invention of horse riding during the 
second millennium BC (Levine et al. 1999) allowed for much greater mobility and 
population expansion.

The Neolithic steppe cultures seem all to have moved in from the west or south; 
from the Cucuteni and Tripolye cultures north of the Black Sea, perhaps from the 
Caucasus, and perhaps even from Turkmenistan in the case of the Kelteminar culture 
of the Aral Sea region. At this time, no serious relationships appear to have existed 
with Neolithic cultures in China. But during the Iron Age of the first millennium BC, 
we know that cultures of oasis regions in the Tarim Basin of Xinjiang, and a little to 
the north in the alluvial outwashes from the Tian Shan in Kazakhstan, were based on 
the production of crops such as wheat, common millet (Panicum), and rice, together 
with sheep, goats, and cattle (Chang and Tourtelotte 1998; Rosen 2001). Given that 
the Tarim Basin once contained Indo-European languages of one of the earliestdifferentiated subgroups in the family (Tocharian), and given the occurrence of common millet cultivation in Neolithic China, Iran, and the western steppes by 5000 BC, 
one begins to wonder if there were earlier Neolithic movements through these desert 
regions. Common millet perhaps originated somewhere between the Caspian Sea 
and Xinjiang (Zohary and Hopf 2000). Did Neolithic settlers ever penetrate the Tarim 
Basin from Afghanistan, the Russian steppes, or even western China? Only future 
research will tell.

First Farmers: The Origins of Agricultural Societies by Peter Bellwood
    
    
    
    
    
  

  

The Indian Subcontinent

The Indian subcontinent - Pakistan, India, Bangladesh, Nepal, and Bhutan - is 
separated from Central Asia by the Himalayas and their westerly extension, the 
Hindu Kush. We can divide the environments of South Asia, at least as far as the 
history of early agriculture is concerned, into five zones of climate, rainfall seasonality, 
and agricultural colonization history (see Figure 6.2 for rainfall seasonality):

The Indus Valley and Baluchistan. Baluchistan witnessed the oldest agriculture in 
South Asia, documented by the introduction of a Southwest Asian economy at 
Mehrgarh by the seventh millennium BC. This economy continued in Baluchistan 
with no significant outside introductions until the appearance of one of the world's 
greatest early urban civilizations - the Harappan (or Indus Valley, or Sarasvati) 
civilization of Pakistan and northwestern India. By the end of the Mature Harappan 
Phase (2600 to 1900 Bc), a number of important new food crops had appeared, 
especially rice from China or eastern India, and millet species from tropical Africa 
(Fuller 2002, 2003; Fuller and Madella 2002). These introductions would have 
allowed, by perhaps 2000 BC, a regime of both summer and winter cropping (Fentress 1985), the latter depending on irrigation because the Indus river system 
receives most of its floodwater during the spring and summer.

2. The Ganges Valley. This region, much wetter generally than the Indus and with 
increasing summer monsoon rainfall reliability, had a mixed economy of both 
Southwest Asian winter crops and rice (a monsoon crop) established at the start 
of the Neolithic, ca. 3000 BC, although the possibility of earlier rice cultivation 
should not be overlooked. The Southwest Asian crops were initially of more 
importance in the west, but rice increased its dominance as time went by, to 
attain the enormous significance it holds in the Ganges Basin today. The Ganges 
farming story thus began, on current evidence, perhaps 4,000 years after Mehrgarh, 
presumably by partial derivation from a westerly Pre-Harappan source combined 
with a more shadowy hint of influence, in the form of domesticated rice (Oryza 
sativa), from China or Southeast Asia.

3. Inland peninsular India. South of the Indus and Ganges basins, the interior Deccan 
Plateau regions of India have a dry monsoonal climate and were first settled in 
the north and west by Pre-Harappan farmers around 3500 BC, in this case with an 
economy based on the Southwest Asian cereals together with native grams (legumes) and millets. New research is suggesting the possibility of an indigenous 
domestication of at least two species each of grams and millets in Karnataka by 
2800 BC (Mehra 1999; Fuller 2002, 2003). African pearl millet and sorghum were 
introduced via Harappan sea contacts, by about 2000 BC. In some drier regions of 
Rajasthan, Gujarat, Maharashtra, and Karnataka there were also developments 
of cattle pastoralism, together with long-term survival of hunter-gatherers in 
exchange contact with the farmers (Misra 1973; Possehl and Kennedy 1979).

4. The humid coastal regions of southwestern, eastern, and northeastern India are 
generally terra incognita as far as evidence of early agriculture is concerned, as is 
Sri Lanka.13 Eastern and northeastern India must have played roles in either an 
independent development of rice cultivation or its successful introduction into the 
subcontinent from the east, perhaps around 3000 BC, but we have no clear archaeological evidence for this as yet from countries such as Bangladesh or Burma.

5. Likewise, the Himalayan region has no detailed archaeological record of early 
agriculture, except for the presence of sites with a mixture of Southwest and East 
(or Central) Asian Neolithic affinities in Kashmir.

What we have in South Asia is therefore quite a complex situation. Unlike Southwest 
Asia, a firm and fairly unitary homeland and expansion history for agriculture cannot 
be established. The reality was clearly a mix of external introduction from several 
sources, combined with some currently rather faint hints of independent internal 
development, especially in the south.

First Farmers: The Origins of Agricultural Societies by Peter Bellwood
    
    
    
    
    
  

  

The domesticated crops of the Indian subcontinent

The crops involved in the South Asian story fall into four groups in terms of ultimate 
origin: Southwest Asian, African, East Asian, and native South Asian (Willcox 1989). The major Southwest Asian cereals and legumes were introduced into the region in 
domesticated form, with the possible exception of barley, which could have been 
domesticated locally. It is also possible that a species of hexaploid wheat (Triticum 
sphaerococcum), grown widely in Harappan sites, was domesticated from a wild forebear in the northwestern subcontinent.

The African millets and legumes appear to have been introduced initially into the 
Indus region during the period of trading activity with Mesopotamia and the Persian 
Gulf, focused on the Akkadian, Third Dynasty of Ur, and Isin-Larsa periods (2350 to 
1800 Bc). The two main millet species are sorghum (Sorghum bicolor) and pearl millet 
(Pennisetum sp.), both of which appeared in the late Harappan and Deccan Chalcolithic 
around 2000 Bc. These are both highly productive summer crops, well attuned to the 
drought conditions that frequently occur in monsoonal areas. Finger millet, Eleusine 
coracana, is believed to be of Ethiopian origin, although its actual presence in South 
Asian sites is still under debate. The African legume species Vigna unguiculata (cowpea) 
and Lablab purpureus (hyacinth bean) had also arrived in South Asia by Late Harappan 
times."

The third group of crops is of East Asian origin. The most important is Asian rice, 
Oryza sativa, domesticated first in the Yangzi Basin by about 7000 BC, although since 
many eastern and northeastern parts of India are also significant homelands of wild 
rice it is likely that some local long-grained (indica) varieties were brought into cultivation here as the rice economy developed. However, there is no clear-cut evidence 
so far for any early and independent Indian domestication of rice, which occurs widely 
in northern India by at least 2500 BC (Singh 1990; Kajale 1991). Two of the millets 
widespread from the late Harappan onward are also possibly of external origin, these 
being foxtail millet (Setaria italica), probably domesticated first in the Yellow Basin of 
China, and broomcorn millet (Panicum miliaceum), probably domesticated in central 
Asia (Weber 1998; Zohary and Hopf 2000).

The domesticated food plants native to the subcontinent are all summer crops, 
such as the legumes black and green gram (Vigna sp.) and horse gram (Dolichos sp.), 
a number of grain-bearing plants in the Paspalum and Chenopodium genera, and two 
minor species of millet (Brachiaria ramosa and Setaria verticillata). Dorian Fuller (2003) 
has suggested that a number of these plants were domesticated independently in the 
Karnataka region of south India. All are of relatively minor significance today.

The upshot of the above is that the pre-Iron Age South Asian Neolithic and 
Chalcolithic cultures, between 3000 and 1000 BC, flourished on the basis of combinations of crops introduced from Southwest Asia via the Indus Valley, from central 
Africa via the Harappan trading system, from other regions of central and eastern 
Asia, as well as crops of local origin. Given that the agricultural colonization of South 
Asia required a crop register to be compiled from such disparate sources, it is not 
surprising that the earliest Neolithic and Chalcolithic cultures in India proper should 
date to around 3000 Bc, perhaps four millennia after the establishment of indigenous 
or unblended economies such as those of Mehrgarh in Pakistan and Pengtoushan in 
the Yangzi Basin. Agricultural spread into the Indian subcontinent clearly required 
considerable gestation and adjustment.

First Farmers: The Origins of Agricultural Societies by Peter Bellwood
    
    
    
    
    
  

  

Regional Trajectories from Hunter-Gathering to Farming in 

South Asia

The consequences of Mehrgarh

In the Indus Basin, the Southwest Asian agropastoral economy introduced to Mehrgarh 
by 7000 Bc developed to become the economic foundation for Mature Harappan 
civilization, via a number of successive Pre-Harappan cultures (Possehl 2002) dating 
variously to between 5000 and 2600 BC in sites such as Mehrgarh, Kot Diji, Amri, and 
Harappa (Figure 4.7). By 3500 BC, aspects of these cultural traditions had extended southeast of the Indus, to occur in the basal deposits of sites such as Dholavira and 
Prabhas Patan in Gujarat, and Kalibangan and Balathal in Rajasthan. As well as villages 
and towns, camps of hunters and pastoralists also appeared east of the Indus system. 
Agriculture had certainly entered northwestern Peninsular India, by movement around 
the southern side of the Thar Desert, many centuries before the opening of the 
Mature Harappan around 2600 Bc.15

Figure 4.7 The early farming cultures of South Asia. Modified from Misra 2001; 
Chakrabarti 1999.

Another spread at a similar date seems also to have occurred around the northern 
peripheries of the Indus basin, to carry the Southwest Asian economy to Neolithic 
sites such as Burzahom and Gufkral in Kashmir (ca. 3000-2500 Bc),16 and possibly 
also by this time into the upper Ganges and Yamuna Valleys. The basal layer in 
Gufkral reveals a rather recent (ca. 3000 Bc) and puzzling aceramic Neolithic, a situation made more complex by the fact that some cultural items from these two 
Kashmir sites, especially the cord-marked pottery and ground stone harvesting knives, 
have apparent Chinese Neolithic affinities. At this stage, however, we have no coherent traces in these sites of rice, or of the African millets.

During the later third millennium BC, continuing contact between the Indus region 
and Gujarat led to the appearance in the latter region of a number of Mature Harappan 
settlements, some fortified. Examples include Surkotada, Dholavira (already settled 
in pre-Harappan times), Rojdi, and Lothal (Figure 4.7). Mature Harappan sites were 
also founded in the Yamuna Valley, for instance at Alamgirpur near Delhi, and 
Harappan-influenced settlements were established at Balathal in Rajasthan and 
Daimabad in Maharashtra. By 1900 BC, the decline of core-region sites such as Harappa 
and Mohenjo-Daro in the Indus Valley system was already under way. Various factors, including movement of the Indus course in Sind, capture of the tributary Sarasvati 
river system by the Yamuna/Ganga, and possible human over-exploitation of a fragile environment (salinization? too many kiln-fired bricks?), were rapidly leading to 
large-scale settlement abandonment in the Harappan heartlands along the Indus and 
its Punjab tributaries (Possehl 1997; Flam 1999). Harappan agricultural populations 
presumably had to face three overlapping choices - reduce population in situ, shift to 
pastoralism, or continue as farmers and move out into new territories.

As documented by Greg Possehl, the Late or Post-Urban Harappan (1900-1400 Bc) 
was apparently a period of considerable population spread into Gujarat and into 
the interfluve (doab) between the upper Ganges and Yamuna rivers in Haryana and 
western Uttar Pradesh. These spreads occurred with the establishment of small 
villages rather than urban settlements and lacked typical Mature Harappan traits such 
as seals, use of script, and cubical stone weights. In both Gujarat and the GangesYamuna doab, these Late Harappan eastward pulses doubtless amalgamated with the 
earlier spreads of Pre-Harappan and Harappan populations, indeed they may merely 
have been later stages of the same long-term movement. But by now the economies 
were enriched by the addition of the African millets and rice.'' The result by 1800 Bc 
was a considerably body of population with access to a full range of winter and 
summer crops, domesticated cattle and caprovines, painted pottery and copper 
metallurgy, expanding to north and south around an ever-desiccating Thar Desert, 
toward the Ganges Basin and Peninsular India.

The big question at this point is whether the earliest farming cultures which 
eventually spread into western India and the Ganges Basin were derived exclusively 
from the Pre-Harappan and Harappan complexes, or whether they incorporated 
other, perhaps local, ancestries. This question cannot be answered easily, but the 
latter situation seems likely, as we will see.

First Farmers: The Origins of Agricultural Societies by Peter Bellwood
    
    
    
    
    
  

  

Western India: Balathal to jorwe

In western India, extending from Balathal and Ahar in southeastern Rajasthan southward to Songaon on the upper Krishna River in Maharashtra, the archaeological 
record reveals a number of closely related Chalcolithic cultures dating from 3500 BC 
in the north, continuing to an ultimate phase of decline and abandonment late in the 
second millennium Bc.18 These cultures have copper tools of Harappan derivation, 
hence there is strictly speaking no Neolithic in this region, although there is a Neolithic 
to the south, as there is in northeastern India. The west coast of India, as indeed also 
the east coast, is currently a region almost devoid of archaeological information 
pertinent for early agricultural questions.

Into this monsoonal region focused on the rather dry Deccan Plateau spread the 
farming economy characteristic of the Harappan in Gujarat, complete with the Southwest Asian cereals and legumes, the African and native millets, and rare occurrences 
of rice, the latter for instance at the site of Dangawada in Madhya Pradesh, directly 
dated by C14 to almost 2000 BC (IAR 1982-83:144). With it came an animal economy 
dominated, as in the Indus Valley itself, by cattle, with sheep and goats usually in 
minor proportions. Black cotton soils were favored for settlement, usually near rivers 
so that agriculture could proceed with irrigation when necessary. Traces of an irrigation canal have been discovered at Inamgaon in Maharashtra. Presumably, as in the 
Late Harappan, a double-cropping economy was practiced, together with a good deal 
of cattle-based pastoralism in drier regions.

The cultures concerned are normally differentiated through minor variations in 
pottery typology, but most Indian archaeologists regard them all as very closely 
related to one another. Vasant Shinde (2000, 2002) divides the Chalcolithic sequence 
of western India into a number of phases running successively from 3500 BC onward, 
being represented first by the Pre-Harappan basal layer at Balathal in Rajasthan, then 
the successive Kayatha, Ahar, Malwa, and Jorwe ceramic complexes, culminating in 
the final decline of Jorwe settlements around 1000 BC, just before the dramatic cultural changes of the Iron Age. For our purposes the details of these successive ceramic phases are not essential, except to note that many artifact types do show fairly 
obvious relationships with the Pre-Harappan and Harappan cultures of the Indus 
region. These include black-on-red painted and wheel-made pottery, pottery kilns 
and clay ovens, pressure-flaked lithic blade industries, simple copper tools made 
mostly in open molds, clay models of bulls and humans, urn burials of children, mud 
or stone-walled rectangular houses, lime plastered floors, and even Harappan-like 
defended enclaves ("citadels") located in third millennium Bc layers at Balathal and 
Daimabad.

The Balathal "citadel" was quite a remarkable construction, enclosing an approximate square of 600 square meters, with stone-faced mud walls 7 meters wide at the 
base and 4 meters high, the whole filled from top to bottom with cow dung cakes 
after its abandonment. As V. N. Misra (2002) notes, this construction is rather an 
enigma, but its cow-dung fill is reminiscent of the ashmound sites in Karnataka that 
are about to be described below. These Chalcolithic settlements were up to 20 hectares in size (Daimabad), often with houses arranged in rectilinear blocks separated 
by lanes, as at Inamgaon, a 5-hectare site that appears to have been fortified with a 
mud wall with rubble bastions and a ditch (Dhavalikar et al. 1988).

The essential question with this western Indian Chalcolithic complex is to determine how it relates to the Pre-Harappan and Harappan sequences on the one hand, 
and to the southern Neolithic cultures that lay beyond it on the other. Most observers clearly favor either direct derivation from the Pre-Harappan and Harappan 
cultural traditions, or very strong influence from them (e.g., Dhavalikar 1988, 1994, 
1997; V. N. Misra 1997, 2002; Shinde 2000, 2002). Yet there seems to be more to the 
western Chalcolithic than just an Indus Valley overflow. For instance, non-Harappan 
types of circular houses with wattle and daub walls are present in Navdatoli in 
Madhya Pradesh, and in the basal layer at Balathal in Rajasthan (ca. 3200 Bc). They 
later became entirely dominant in the Late Jorwe phase in Maharashtra during the 
late second millennium BC (Dhavalikar 1988). At face value this might mean little, but 
there is at least a hint here of a "native" element not immediately derivable from the 
sidewalks of Mohenjo-Daro. V. H. Sonawane (2000:143) notes that circular huts also 
appear in several sites of the Post-urban Harappan Phase in Gujarat, again suggesting 
that these Chalcolithic cultures contained an ethnic tradition not simply derivable 
from the Harappan.

First Farmers: The Origins of Agricultural Societies by Peter Bellwood
    
    
    
    
    
  

  

Southern India

In Karnataka, Andhra Pradesh, and Tamil Nadu, the picture is slightly different from 
that just described for western India. We have no good Neolithic data from Kerala, 
and Sri Lanka seems only to have been settled by farmers during the Iron Age, after 
1000 Be. Virtually the whole archaeological record in the south comes from the dry 
monsoonal regions in the southern inland part of the Deccan Plateau. In northern 
Karnataka, the earliest Neolithic sites appear to have been based on cattle pastoralism, and date back to about 2800 Be. A classic site in this series is the Utnur ashmound, 
which had a sub-rectangular stockaded enclosure about 60 meters long fenced with 
palm trunks, sufficient in area for perhaps 500 cattle. Inside the stockade was a thick 
layer of burned cow dung, with several hoof impressions. Dwelling huts (presumably 
circular) were constructed between the enclosure and a separate outer stockade 
(Allchin 1963; Allchin and Allchin 1982:123).

Another ashmound site at Budihal, dated to 2300 BC, had possibly four cattle pens, 
of which the major excavated example (Budihal Locality 1) contained a 3-meter-high 
mound of burned dung, an adjacent animal pen fenced by a rubble embankment, 
and a flanking habitation area of about 1.3 hectares with the stone foundations of rectangular and oval houses. The dung is believed to have been derived from nocturnal 
cattle-corralling, perhaps burned periodically to reduce flies. Such periodic burning 
suggests that the dung was not in demand as fertilizer, thus that field agriculture might 
have been absent. However, the plant remains from Budihal do contain some barley, 
horse gram, bean, and millet-type seeds, so we cannot assume that these people were 
purely pastoralists (Paddayya 1993, 1998; Kajale 1996b).

The ashmound sites contain querns, stone axes, a blade industry, and pottery 
comprising plain gray, incised, and painted wares, handmade and not kiln-fired in the 
earliest layers. Antecedents are obscure, but the recently excavated non-ashmound 
site of Watgal, near Budihal, has a number of features reminiscent of Chalcolithic 
sites further north in the Deccan - a child urn burial and clay-lined basins paralleled 
at Inamgaon, and painted pottery, including some in Jorwe style (Deavaraj et al. 1995; 
DuFresne et al. 1998). Budihal has also yielded urn burials of children. Watgal, which 
has occupation dating from as early as 2700 BC, also has remains of a rather interesting plant found widely in Southeast Asia and the western Pacific - the betel nut.

Elsewhere in southern India, Neolithic occupation sites such as Hallur, Tekkalakota, 
Paiyampalli, Brahmagiri, and Sanganakallu (Figure 4.7) have varying combinations of 
painted pottery, child urn burials, blade industries, circular houses with bamboo 
walls (Tekkalakota and Sanganakallu), and cattle figurines. Most of these sites appear 
to have commenced occupation in the early second millennium Bc, with copper 
appearing fairly soon after this date in sites such as Ramapuram, Hallur, and Maski. 
In general, the focus on domesticated cattle, painted pottery, and circular houses 
links this region loosely with the northern Deccan Chalcolithic sites, and indeed 
in some sites there is a fairly late spread of Jorwe-type ceramics, particularly into 
northern Karnataka. Plant remains from these southern sites include the native grams 
and millets (with apparently no African millets present until 1500 Bc), with less frequent 
occurrences of wheat, barley, and rice (Kajale 1996b; Venkatasubbaiah and Kajale 
1991; Korisettar et al. 2002; Fuller 2003).

As far as origins of the southern Neolithic and Chalcolithic are concerned, the 
radiocarbon series indicates a slight time-cline from north to south, from Rajasthan 
to Karnataka, between about 3000 and 2500 BC. This suggests that the whole series 
may belong to a single episode of agricultural dispersal. There is considerable local 
variation, but over such a vast area this is to be expected. However, the possibility 
that southern India also witnessed an independent domestication of a number of 
local and relatively minor millets and grams has recently been suggested. If Fuller's 
(2003) suggestions of a native and independent South Indian course toward plant 
domestication, dating from about 2800 BC in the ashmound phase, prove to be correct, 
then our understanding of the South Asian Neolithic will be greatly enriched.

First Farmers: The Origins of Agricultural Societies by Peter Bellwood
    
    
    
    
    
  

  

The Ganges Basin and northeastern India

The Ganges Basin, with major tributaries such as the Yamuna, witnessed a cultural 
trajectory from Neolithic onward which is superficially similar to that of Chalcolithic 
western India, but rather different in style and detail. There is another complication with the Ganges, especially in its middle and lower portions from Allahabad eastward, 
this being that the spread of agriculture might have been two-layered, with a period 
of rice cultivation in the east older than, or at least contemporary with, the arrival of 
the Southwest Asian crops. But the evidence is currently most unclear on this. The 
Southeast Asian evidence offers little help, for while we know that rice cultivation 
was present in Thailand by 2500 BC, we have no good data on this question from 
Burma, Bangladesh, or northeastern India.

As far as Assam and the other provinces of far northeastern India are concerned, it 
is clear that some form of Southeast Asian Neolithic with cord-marked pottery (sometimes with tripods), spindle whorls, and occasional shouldered stone adzes was making 
a presence by soon after 3000 BC, succeeding a rather poorly known series of late huntergatherer lithic industries (Rao 1977; Singh 1997). Presumably, these Neolithic people 
grew rice, but we cannot be certain of this. In the central and eastern Ganges basin 
there is much stronger evidence in many sites for rice cultivation associated with the 
use of a style of cord-marked pottery that could have Southeast Asian antecedents. But 
one problem here is that cord-marked pottery also occurs in some Harappan-derived 
assemblages to the west." In addition, there are still many problems of chronology, 
especially in the identification of any real precedence of Southeast Asian markers 
beneath those elements of the Ganges Neolithic (for instance, Black and Red Ware 
pottery, barley, copper technology, sheep, and goat) derived from westerly sources.

Three of the key sites here are Koldihwa, Mahagara, and Chopani-Mando in the 
Belan valley, which drains north into the Ganges near Allahabad. They have stirred a 
debate within South Asian archaeology focused on claimed radiocarbon dates for rice 
and cord-marked pottery, especially from Koldihwa, extending back to 6500 BC (Sharma 
et al. 1980; IAR 1975-76:85). But Mahagara, which has pottery like that from Koldihwa, 
is dated by C14 to the second millennium BC. Another related site called Kunjhun II 
dates to about 2000 BC (IAR 1977-78:89; Clark and Khanna 1989). The upshot of all 
this is that few people now believe that the early Koldihwa dates relate to the Neolithic 
material from the site at all (e.g., Dhavalikar 1997:230; Glover and Higham 1996; but 
they are accepted by Chakrabarti 1999:328).

The current situation in most Ganges sites is that rice and cord-marked pottery 
occur together with non-impressed pottery styles (Black and Red Ware in particular), 
and elements of the Southwest Asian agropastoral complex. This appears to be the 
actual situation at Koldihwa (Misra 1977:108), and in a group of culturally related 
sites at Senuwar, Imlidih Khurd I, Chirand, and Narhan, together covering an occupation sequence from about 2500 to 1000 BC. These sites have between them an 
economy based on rice, barley, bread wheat, lentils, grams, sorghum, and pearl millet 
(the last two reported at Imlidih Khurd).2° Sites downstream in West Bengal, such as 
Pandu Rajar Dhibi, appear to have focused more on rice cultivation, as befitting their 
higher rainfall. Domesticated animals include cattle, water buffalo, pig, sheep, and 
goat, with horse claimed at Imlidih Khurd in the late second millennium Bc. Houses 
have wattle and daub walls and are generally of circular plan. Some sites (especially 
Chirand, but not Narhan) have microblade and bone industries like those in Koldihwa 
and Chopani-Mando.Z'

In order to gain a better perspective on the Ganges basin as a whole we need to 
retreat westward to Punjab and the Ganges-Yamuna doab, since it is in these regions 
that the non-corded (Black and Red) pottery styles appear to have originated before 
spreading downstream toward Bengal. This area has both Pre-Harappan and Mature 
Harappan occupation extending east to the vicinity of Delhi on the Yamuna River. 
Between the Yamuna and Ganges rivers, downstream as far as Allahabad, the oldest 
pottery is termed "Ochre Colored Pottery" (OCP) - normally wheel-made, red-slipped, 
and frequently painted with black patterns. Much of this pottery is water rolled and 
often in poor condition when found, and there is considerable disagreement about its 
immediate antecedents. Some OCP sites in Rajasthan could be pre-Harappan, but 
others clearly indicate a degree of Harappan influence and contact (Lal 1984:33). For 
instance, many artifacts found in OCP sites, such as pottery toy cart wheels, bull 
figurines, and carnelian beads, have definite Harappan affinities. Many OCP sites also 
have a basically Harappan economy with very few summer crops apart from rice. On 
the other hand, the copper tool industry (including the famous "copper hoards") 
associated with the OCP cannot clearly so be derived from the Harappan. The copper itself was local to northeastern Rajasthan (Khetri-Ganeshwar region), and was 
supplied from here to Harappan cities as well as to the Ganges sites.

For the OCP, a general origin at about 3000-2500 Bc in Punjab or Rajasthan would 
seem to be indicated (Agrawala and Kumar 1993; Chakrabarti 1999; Sabi 2001). Clearly, 
it evolved side by side with the Harappan and was strongly influenced by it, but its 
main significance is that it remains the first attested episode of agricultural dispersal 
into the Ganges Basin from the west. In some OCP sites, such as Atranjikhera and 
Jodhpura (Gaur 1983; Agrawala and Kumar 1993), the OCP developed into the Black 
and Red Ware (BRW) with slipped and burnished red exteriors of the type found 
widely in the middle and lower Ganges Basin. Dates for BRW in Bihar appear to follow 
2500 BC, perhaps 2000 BC in Bengal. The BRW was then succeeded during the Iron Age, 
after 1000 BC, by a different style of Painted Gray Ware (PGW). Many archaeologists 
clearly regard the sequence of OCP through BRW to PGW in the Ganges Basin as 
continuous,22 and the issue of continuity (versus cultural disruption) in the Ganges 
sequence, from OCP through to early historical times, lies at the crux of the debate 
about early Indo-European settlement in the subcontinent. We return to this issue later.

In my opinion, the best explanation for the spread of agriculture through the Ganges 
Basin is that a cultural assemblage with cord-marked pottery and rice cultivation was 
moving upstream from the east at about the same time as a separate complex with 
Southwest Asian crops and OCP pottery was moving downstream from the west, 
that is at about 3000 BC. The resulting fusion appears to have been rapid and without 
undue social upheaval.

First Farmers: The Origins of Agricultural Societies by Peter Bellwood
    
    
    
    
    
  

  

Europe and South Asia in a Nutshell

The several dispersals of agriculture into and through South Asia were even more 
multiplex than those in Europe. We have three external sources of crops - Southwest Asia, northern Sub-Saharan Africa, and East Asia - together with a degree of local 
domestication. In Europe, farming took 3,000 years to spread from Anatolia to the 
British Isles. In South Asia, it seems to have taken even longer to spread from northern 
Pakistan to Sri Lanka, without considering the relatively unknown chronology for 
early rice cultivation in the northeast. These early spreads of farming were clearly 
inexorable, even unstoppable in the long term, but they were not instantaneous. 
Along a given latitude, yes, there could be relative swiftness, as in the case of the 
northern coastline of the Mediterranean from Greece to Portugal. But across latitude, 
or across climatic divides, such as that from winter to summer rainfall that separates 
Iran and Afghanistan from the Ganges Basin, the rate was reduced to a heavy plod. 
However the farming spread, it was neither by quick-smart adoption by clever huntergatherers, nor was it by express trains carrying hungry farmers ever toward the 
horizon, leaving astonished and landless hunters in their wake.
