Chapter 5 - Africa: An Independent Focus of Agricultural Development?
=====================================================================

First Farmers: The Origins of Agricultural Societies by Peter Bellwood
    
    
    
    
    
  

  

Chapter 5

Africa: An Independent Focus of 

Agricultural Development?

The African continent, with the exception of Egypt, does not yet have the density of 
archaeological coverage which would allow a discussion as detailed as that presented 
in chapters 3 and 4 for Southwest Asia, Europe, or South Asia. It is also orders of 
magnitude vaster than western Eurasia and was never dominated by just one region, 
similar in size to the Fertile Crescent, where evolution of agriculture from an indigenous hunter-gatherer background can so easily be demonstrated. We search for 
needles of information in a huge range of environments - deserts, savannas, mountains, and rain forests.

Until recently, the belt of grassland (the Sahel zone) and parkland (the Savanna 
zone) that today stretches across the continent between the Sahara and the rain 
forest, between about 5° and 15° north, was believed to be the homeland for a 
number of important native crops (Figure 5.1). New discoveries concerning Holocene 
climatic zonation in the Sahara, detailed below, now render this zone much more 
extensive toward the north. The most significant crops are summer-rainfall cereals, 
particularly African rice (Oryza glaberrima), pearl millet (Pennisetum glaucum), and 
sorghum (Sorghum bicolor). Guinea yam (Dioscorea rotundata) was domesticated in the 
rain-forest fringes to the south, and finger millet (Eleusine coracana) further east, in 
Ethiopia or southern Sudan. Sub-Saharan agricultural populations subsisted on these 
and other African crops throughout their prehistory, whereas Egyptian and North 
African Neolithic populations depended on cereals and legumes of Southwest Asian 
origin, as did many populations of the Ethiopian Highlands (Barnett 1999; D'Andrea 
et al. 1999). No major crops or animals were ever domesticated in Africa south of 
the Equator.

In addition, Indonesian visitors contributed Southeast Asian crops such as bananas, 
taro, and greater yams to tropical Africa, through movements perhaps connected 
with the Austronesian settlement of Madagascar at about 1,500 years ago. However, the recent finding of banana phytoliths in Cameroon dated to 500 BC (Watson and 
Woodhouse 2001; Mindzie et al. 2001) raises intriguing possibilities of Indian Ocean 
travel in much earlier times, a topic already discussed in connection with the transfer 
of African crops to India and Pakistan.

A major question for Africa is whether or not the Sahel and Savanna zones, and 
also the Ethiopian Highlands, contained one or more regions of primary agricultural 
origin. Currently, this is a most difficult question to answer, since sub-Saharan Africa has no archaeological evidence for domesticated crops until after 2000 BC. It does 
appear, however, that the Saharan region was much wetter than now in the early 
Holocene, owing to a northward shift of the monsoon and the belts of grassland and 
savanna, with a consequent shrinkage of the desert. The wild cereal "homelands" 
shown in Figure 5.1 would also have moved northward, as we know from the presence 
of wild sorghum in archaeological sites dating to the end of the Pleistocene in Egypt's 
Western Desert. This situation doubtless encouraged an increasing emphasis on wild 
annual cereal collection and possibly also native cattle management by about 8500 BC, 
and some groups also began to use incised, stamped, and impressed pottery in several 
Saharan and Nilotic regions by this time.

Figure 5.1 The major present-day vegetational regions of Africa, with Harlan's homelands 
for some of the major crops domesticated there. Also shown is the southern boundary of 
desert at about 8000 BC, when the Sahara was experiencing moister conditions than now. 
It should be noted that Harlan's homelands reflect present-day plant distributions; during 
the wetter phases of the Holocene these distributions would have moved significantly 
northward, especially for sorghum and pearl millet. Data from Harlan 1992; Marshall 1998; 
Marshall and Hildebrand 2002.

Since these developments seem to have occurred before the first evidence for Asian 
sheep and goats in northeastern Africa (ca. 5500 Bc), they presumably owed nothing 
to the Southwest Asian agricultural economy or cultural sequence. However, no 
certain remains of domesticated animals or plants have ever been found in these early 
Saharan sites and there is as yet insufficient evidence to claim a food-producing 
subsistence pattern with full confidence. Before examining these issues further it is 
necessary to outline one aspect of African early agricultural prehistory that does have 
relatively clear definition.

First Farmers: The Origins of Agricultural Societies by Peter Bellwood
    
    
    
    
    
  

  

The Spread of the Southwest Asian Agricultural Complex 

into Egypt

By virtue of its origins in the African monsoon rainfall zone, the Nile Valley in Egypt 
has a flood regime almost perfect for the cereals and legumes that originated in 
Southwest Asia. This is why, of course, many scholars in the past regarded Egypt, 
erroneously, as a locus of agricultural origin. The Nile floods reach southern Egypt 
from mid-August and the delta four to six weeks later. The water is relatively free 
of salt and floods dampen the soil for about two months in autumn and winter, 
allowing crops to be grown with little further irrigation and without the hazards of 
salinization and low winter river levels which so afflicted contemporary Sumerians in 
Mesopotamia.

The main problem for the idea that Egypt was an origin locus for agriculture is 
that none of the relevant crops existed there in the wild. Paleolithic Egyptians, such 
as those who used the Wadi Kubanniya campsites (Figure 5.2) about 20,000 years 
ago, exploited fish, migrant birds, wild cattle, gazelle, and hartebeest, and used 
grindstones to prepare a toxic tuber (Cyperus rotund us) for leaching prior to consumption (Wendorf et al. 1980; Hillman 1989; Jensen et al. 1991; Close 1996). Although 
grains of barley and einkorn were found in Wadi Kubanniya early in the investigations, more accurate dating has shown that they are intrusive into the sediments, and 
of recent date. It now seems that the late glacial Nile Valley in Egypt, at that time 
hyper-arid, supported no major cereals at all. The glossed stone blades once regarded 
as cereal harvesters are now assumed to have been used for harvesting wetland 
tubers and possibly palm fruits.

Figure 5.2Archaeological sites of northern Africa discussed in the text

When the Wadi Kubanniya campsites were occupied, the alluvium-filled late glacial 
Nile valley had both low water levels and low evaporation. The floodplain retained 
seasonal channels and pools of water - a landscape fairly attractive for mobile hunters 
and gatherers. As the climate became warmer and wetter at the end of the Pleistocene, 
the increasing Nile flood-power scoured out the alluvium toward the low sea level, 
producing an incised valley within which there are very few signs of human settlement. With the eventual rise and stabilization of sea level close to its current height 
during the early Holocene, the Nile Delta was able to recommence growth, and the 
valley began to refill with the rich alluvial soil which much later was to support the 
citizens of Pharaonic Egypt.

According to Stanley and Warne (1993), this stabilization and alluviation commenced between 6500 and 5500 Bc, although Hassan (1997a) favors an earlier date, 
starting about 10,000 BC. Whichever is correct, the striking fact remains that the Nile 
Valley cannot be demonstrated to have been settled by agriculturalists until about 
5500-5000 BC, at which time a full agropastoral economy with pottery was introduced from Southwest Asia. Unless an aceramic Neolithic has been totally submerged 
beneath the Nile alluvium (Midant-Reynes 2000:106), the Nile Valley received its 
agriculture even later than Greece and Italy, a circumstance which, from the perspective offered in chapter 2, surely reflects the forbidding presence of the Sinai desert 
barrier between Palestine and the Nile Delta. Like the Californian Indians, early 
Holocene Egyptians did not need agriculture and did not seek it, until the tables 
turned and agriculture sought them as a result of dispersal events originating in the 
southern Levant.

When agriculturalists first entered the Nile Valley at about 5500 BC, other people 
who made pottery, collected wild sorghum, and, according to some authorities, 
herded cattle, had already been living at Nabta Playa and Bir Kiseiba in Egypt's 
Western Desert for possibly 3,000 years, during periodic and brief phases of wetter 
climate (Wendorf et al. 2001; Dahlberg and Wasylikowa 1996; Wasylikowa and 
Dahlberg 1999; Close 1996). There is no clear evidence that such populations were 
living in the Nile Valley itself at this time, but the possibility must be considered. 
Mid-Holocene dessication of the Sahara with retraction of the summer monsoon 
finally led to virtual abandonment of Nabta Playa and other oasis settlements by 
about 4000 ac, and this might have led to a kind of refuge movement into the Nile 
Valley, where Saharan people would have met and mixed with the descendants of 
the Southwest Asian Neolithic population responsible for the introduction of the 
Southwest Asian agricultural tradition into the Nile Valley about 1,500 years earlier. 
The resulting amalgam was later to develop into one of the most remarkable civilizations of the ancient world, a true synthesis of the Oriental and the African.

Within the Egyptian Neolithic lifestyle are found a number of specific cultural items 
of presumed Palestinian origin, even though no precise source can be pinpointed. 
Such items include side-notched and tanged bifacially flaked arrowheads (Helwan 
points - Figure 3.5 /1 - occurring in the PPNA and PPNB in the Levant as well as in 
the Nile Valley), pear-shaped maceheads, polished stone axes, footed pottery different from the incised and impressed wares of the Sudan and Saharan early Holocene sites, together with emmer wheat, barley, flax and linen, pigs, cattle, sheep, and goats 
(Arkell 1975; Hassan 1988; Koslowski and Ginter 1989; Smith 1989; Midant-Reynes 
2000). These items appear suddenly in the archaeological record, suggesting introduction, except for the cattle which could, according to recent genetic research, have 
been domesticated from native stock in North Africa (Bradley et al. 1996; Bradley and 
Loftus 2000; Hanotte et al. 2002).

The western and southern regions of Arabia were also wetter than now in the 
early and middle Holocene, so a possibility of cultural transmission across the Red 
Sea or Bab al Mandab must be borne in mind. However, the archaeological record of 
Arabia so far reveals no clear evidence for Neolithic agriculture (Edens and Wilkinson 
1998), despite a presence in southern Arabia of what appear to be early Holocene 
check dams for trapping soil (McCorriston and Oches 2001). Phillipson (1998:41) 
notes the presence of villages during the third millennium BC in the Yemen highlands, with domesticated cattle, sheep, goats, and pigs.

In the Neolithic sites of the Fayum depression, the new agricultural economy is 
represented by deep storage pits lined with basketry and straw matting that could 
hold up to 200-300 kilograms of grain. The Fayum lithics, with sickle blades, flake 
axes, and hollow-based projectile points, show no signs of continuity from the preceding microlithic industries of the region. Like the early pottery of the Levant, that 
of the Fayum sites is chaff-tempered. These sites have not yielded any architectural 
evidence, but a site at Merimde near the western edge of the Nile delta, approximately contemporary with the Fayum sites, has yielded remains of post and matting 
shelters and mud-walled oval houses with semi-subterranean floors, arranged along 
paths. Merimde appears to have covered about 2.4 hectares and has similar pottery 
and a similar economy to that of the Fayum.

Indeed, the basal level of Merimde also has Helwan points, clay figurines, and 
herringbone-incised pottery, the latter paralleled in the Yarmukian ceramic Neolithic 
of the Jordan Valley (Kantor 1992), a period of small village agriculture with associated goat pastoralism established at about 6000 ac, following the PPNC agricultural 
decline. This decline in itself also offers a strong hint as to why movement into the 
Nile Valley might have occurred (Hassan 2002, 2003). Sling stones and spindle whorls 
also suggest Palestinian connections, but architecturally, of course, these Egyptian 
villages of wattle and daub huts would have appeared very different from the contemporary mud brick villages typical of the Fertile Crescent.

All of this suggests that the Egyptian Predynastic of the millennium prior to Unification was an amalgam of a Southwest Asian economy and technology with cultural 
traditions of native Nile and Saharan origin, the latter in evidence in the Badarian 
Neolithic of Upper (southern) Egypt with its black-topped pottery (Hassan 1997b; 
Midant-Reynes 2000). Which tradition(s) ultimately dominated, in terms of language 
and population source, is a matter to be discussed later with respect to the ancestry 
of the Afroasiatic language family.

As far as the rest of Mediterranean North Africa is concerned, details are few, but 
the Southwest Asian Neolithic economy with sheep, goats, and cattle can certainly 
be traced during the sixth millennium ac at the cave of Haua Fteah in Cyrenaica, presumably heading west. A spread of pastoral peoples along the North African 
coastline is of course likely; pottery and evidence for sheep/goat herding occur along 
the Moroccan and Algerian coastlines dating from about 5500 BC. But the arrival time 
of cereal agriculture here is less clear, with current estimates not extending back 
much before 2000 ac (Holl 1998; David Lubell pers. comm.).

So far, therefore, the spread of the Southwest Asian economy into Egypt and its 
amalgamation with a Saharan tradition of pottery usage and cattle exploitation seems 
well documented. South of Egypt, the Fertile Crescent cereals soon met a barrier in 
the monsoonal summer-rainfall climate of Sudan, and their spread into the more 
suitable climatic conditions of the Ethiopian Highlands seems to have occurred only 
within the past 3,000 years (Barnett 1999; D'Andrea et al. 1999; Bard et al. 2000). But 
what of the rest of the African continent? Here we enter an arena of truly gigantic 
geographical scale.

First Farmers: The Origins of Agricultural Societies by Peter Bellwood
    
    
    
    
    
  

  

The Origins of the Native African Domesticates

Two initial questions arise:

1. Which African crops and animals were domesticated, and where?

2. Were these domestications due to independent actions by native Saharan and 
sub-Saharan hunter-gatherer communities, to stimuli from the spread of Southwest Asian agriculture and animal herding, or to a combination of both factors? 
Many archaeologists hold the view that increasing dessication of the Sahara after 
2000 BC caused herders to move south, wherever their ultimate origins, perhaps 
to trigger plant domesticatory processes in the Sahel and savanna regions 
(Wetterstrom 1998; Neumann 1999; Casey 2000; Hassan 2002; Haour 2003).

First of all, let us see what seems to be generally agreed with respect to plant domestication. Figure 5.1 shows the homelands for a number of African crops according to 
the botanist Jack Harlan, based on modern plant distributions (these homelands were 
certainly more extensive in the early Holocene). Of these, the most significant 
include the cereals sorghum (Sorghum bicolor) and pearl millet (Pennisetum glaucum), 
both domesticated in the dry Sahel and Savanna zone. Then we have African rice 
(Oryza glaberrima) and Guinea yam (Dioscorea rotundata), these being crops of the 
forest-savanna boundary in West Africa. To these we can add oil palm, cowpea, and 
groundnut in West Africa, and a number of Ethiopian crops such as finger millet 
(Eleusine coracana), the cereal tef (Eragrostis tef), ground into flour for making flat 
bread, and the banana-like plant called ensete (Musa ensete) that provides an edible 
pulp from the base of its leaves.

All of the domesticated cereals in the above list are annuals, as they are in Southwest Asia and China. But the African cereals have high tendencies toward crossrather than self-pollination, and so any selection, unconscious or not, by humans for 
domesticated phenotypes would only work well if the stocks were planted beyond the ranges of wild stands (Willcox 1989:282; Haaland 1995, 1999; Wetterstrom 1998). 
This is fairly significant since it is possible that the African cereals might not have 
been so easy to domesticate as those in Southwest Asia. It may have required a 
greater degree of focused human intention to complete the process.

This being the case, it might come as no surprise to find that the hard evidence for 
native African plant domestication is very recent in time, commencing about 20001500 ne for pearl millet at Dhar Tichitt in Mauretania and Birimi in northern Ghana, 
and only during the first millennium BC for sorghum and African rice.' These dates 
are bolstered by the evidence that sorghum and pearl millet were taken to northwestern South Asia and possibly the Arabian Peninsula during Late Harappan times 
(ca. 2000-1500 BC; see chapter 4). Prior to 2000 BC, these millets were apparently 
exploited in Africa as wild plants, regardless of whether or not they were actually 
cultivated.

Indeed, wild millet grains from a number of species, and impressions in pottery, 
occur in many sites right across the Sahara dating from about 8500 BC onward (Figure 5.2).Z People were harvesting morphologically wild sorghum and pearl millet 
during the early Holocene in northern Africa, although evidence for actual cultivation remains elusive. Nevertheless, Randi Haaland (1999) suggests that cultivation 
was occurring in sites in Sudan by about 5000 ac, and makes the important observation that none of the Sudan Mesolithic sites have stone sickles, hence the potential 
"forcing" of the domestication process suspected for the sickle-using Levant PPN 
cultures would not have occurred. Domesticated sorghum is not present in northeastern Africa until Roman times (Rowley-Conwy et al. 1997).

Given the uncertainty over plant domestication, we may ask what can be ascertained about exploitation patterns of the cattle, sheep, and goats whose bones also 
occur in many of these early pottery-bearing sites? North Africa had native cattle at 
the end of the Pleistocene, and it is entirely possible that they were domesticated 
separately from those in Eurasia. But the evidence for an independent domestication 
process for cattle is uncertain. Cattle bones are first found during the El Adam wet 
phase, dating to about 8000 BC, at Nabta Playa and Bit Kiseiba in western Egypt 
(Figure 5.2 and 5.3). Many point out that cattle could not have survived in the wild in 
such marginal regions, even in the Early Holocene (Marshall 1998; Wendorf and 
Schild 1998; Wendorf et al. 2001; Hassan 1997b, 2000). Fiona Marshall and Elisabeth 
Hildebrand (2002) have recently proposed a scenario for early cattle domestication in 
the eastern Sahara, the main prompting agent being a desire for "predictable access 
to resources." In other words, groups living in environments wet enough from time 
to time to support cattle, but not wet enough to support them all of the time, turned 
to herding them instead, and thus moving to good resource areas as the environment 
dictated. This scenario is most intriguing, since it tends to reverse the order of events 
that we witness in the Near East. In Saharan Africa, it seems that cattle herding and 
pottery-making preceded plant domestication, and animal domestication in its early 
phases went hand-in-hand with mobility, not sedentism.

At present, these suggestions are still under debate. Many archaeologists are rather 
skeptical, favoring an appearance of domesticated cattle at only about 6000-5000 BC, by which time sheep and goat are agreed to have been introduced to Egypt and the 
Sudan from a Southwest Asian source (MacDonald 2000; Gifford-Gonzalez 2000). 
At Kadero in Sudan, for instance, domesticated cattle, sheep, and goat all appear 
together at around 5000 BC. Furthermore, at Dakhleh Oasis in the Egyptian Western 
Desert, about 400 kilometers northwest of Nabta Playa, neither cattle nor pottery are 
present in a long and well-dated sequence until about 5000 BC (MacDonald 1998). As 
Andrew Sherratt (1995:11) points out:

Although it is still maintained, for instance, that cattle domestication began, quite 
independently of contemporary Levantine developments, in the Sahara in the seventh 
millennium BC, what a coincidence it would be if that were really the case!

Figure 5.3 Dated sites with evidence for early domesticated cattle in Africa, with the 
approximate northern boundaries of the tsetse belt shown at 3000 Bc and today. Data from 
Bower 1991; Barnett 1999; Marshall and Hildebrand 2002.

We can conclude at this point that communities with caprovine husbandry are 
certainly attested in northern Africa, particularly in Sudan, at about 5000 BC. Such 
communities might have been involved earlier in the management of cattle and the 
cultivation of morphologically wild cereals in the eastern Sahara, the millets perhaps 
for animal fodder in the first instance (Wetterstrom 1998). Indeed, as we will see 
later, linguistic reconstructions for the Nilo-Saharan language family make early 
Holocene cattle keeping or management of some kind in the Sahara a very viable 
possibility. In addition, Graeme Barker (2003) suggests that Barbary sheep might also 
have been managed in the early Holocene in the central Sahara. This is rapidly 
becoming a debate of great interest.

First Farmers: The Origins of Agricultural Societies by Peter Bellwood
    
    
    
    
    
  

  

The Development and Spread of Agriculture in 

Sub-Saharan Africa

The idea that Saharan and Sudanic herders pressed southward out of the Sahara due 
to increasing dessication after 3000 BC is widespread in the archaeological literature 
(McIntosh and McIntosh 1988; McIntosh 1994; Casey 1998; 2000). By 2500 Bc, domesticated cattle, sheep, and goats had spread as far south as Lake Turkana in northern 
Kenya, perhaps from a Sudan origin and presumably following a southward retreat, 
under drying climatic conditions, of the zone of tsetse fly infestation (Figure 5.3) 
(Gifford-Gonzalez 1998, 2000). These people combined animal herding with hunting and gathering, made pottery, but appear to have had no grain cultivation. The 
spread of cattle through the belt of tsetse fly infestation occurred very much later 
with Bantu populations, making an initial appearance below 10°S early in the first 
millennium AD. Diane Gifford-Gonzalez points to the many central African bovine 
diseases, including rinderpest, trypanosomiasis (carried by tsetse flies), and malignant catarrhal fever derived from wildebeest, as major reasons for this slowdown 
in spread.

In the western Sahara, the evidence for cattle exploitation is younger than that in 
the Nile Valley and Sudan, generally after 3000 BC (Figure 5.3). By 2000 BC, populations 
belonging to the Kintampo cultural complex of Ivory Coast and Ghana had begun to 
herd sheep, goats, and possibly cattle. The Kintampo represents a fairly sharp change 
from preceding Late Stone Age cultures, being associated with wattle and daub house 
construction in village-sized concentrations, pottery (including figurines of animals 
and humans), ground stone tools (axes, points, arm rings) and evidence for widespread 
exchange networks (Anquandah 1993; Stahl 1994:76; Casey 2000; D'Andrea and Casey 
2002). Ann Stahl (1993:268) notes that Kintampo pottery is quite homogeneous across 
a large area, particularly with respect to the popularity of comb-stamped motifs, 
common also at this time in northern Niger (Roset 1987; Barich 1997).

Evidence from Birimi in northern Ghana shows that Kintampo people grew 
domesticated pearl millet during the early second millennium BC, as at contemporary 
sites further north such as Dhar Tichitt in Mauretania (D'Andrea et al. 2001; Neumann 
1999; Klee and Zach 1999). In the Kintampo sites they also exploited oil palm and canarium nuts, as did contemporary pottery-using populations living in the Shum 
Laka rockshelter further east in Cameroon (De Maret 1996; Lavachery 2001). The 
Kintampo and contemporary sites thus suggest that domesticated pearl millet cultivation was quite widespread in the savanna zones north of the rain forest by 1500 Bc, 
together with caprovine herding.

First Farmers: The Origins of Agricultural Societies by Peter Bellwood
    
    
    
    
    
  

  

The Appearance of Agriculture in Central and 

Southern Africa

In 1500 BC, the whole southern half of the African continent, including the rain forest 
and probably all regions below the Equator, still remained the terrain of hunters and 
gatherers. That is, until the unleashing of one of the most striking and far-flung 
episodes of agricultural spread in world prehistory. This is the spread associated with 
the expansion of the Bantu languages from their presumed homeland in Cameroon, 
around and partly through the rain forest and down the whole eastern side of subSaharan Africa, until they reached their limits against the Kalahari Desert and the 
Cape zone of Mediterranean winter rainfall.

By the 17th century, agriculture had spread south to the Great Fish River in South 
Africa, an area at that time occupied by speakers of the Xhosa language of the Bantu 
family. The major part of this expansion, from Lake Victoria southward to Natal, 
took place over 3,500 kilometers in under a millennium. It must rank as one of the 
most rapid spreads of an agricultural complex, in this case with an Iron Age cultural 
affiliation, on record (Ehret 1998). We return to the Bantu languages and their dispersal 
later, but must here plot the archaeological record for the progression of pottery- and 
iron-using farmers eastward and southward.

Luckily, there seems to be general agreement on the overall dates and cultural 
contexts for this phenomenon, particularly in the eastern regions of Africa, despite 
obvious disagreement about the internal structure, the number of "streams," their 
sources, and so forth (Vansina 1995). In the west, the beginning of agriculture in the 
rain forest is still rather poorly understood; the appearance here of ceramic and 
putatively agricultural assemblages seems to be later in time than Kintampo, perhaps 
commencing with the Imbonga horizon of the Congo Basin about 500 BC (Eggert 
1993, 1996; Mercader et al. 2000). But for eastern Africa we can focus on a much 
clearer overall picture, commencing with David Phillipson's (1993) incorporation of 
all the early pottery styles in eastern Africa into what he terms the "Chifumbaze 
complex," commencing west of Lake Victoria in the middle or late first millennium 
BC (Figure 5.4).

Chifumbaze-style pottery, distinguished by its horizontal zones of incised and 
stamped patterns, has several local substyles. Urewe around Lake Victoria seems to 
be the oldest (ca. 500-200 Bc), followed rapidly by Kwale of Kenya, Nkope of Malawi 
and Zambia, Matola of Mozambique (first century AD), and then related Early Iron 
Age ceramics of the mid-first millennium AD in South Africa. The main burst of 
expansion probably occurred more quickly than the 1,000-year time span just indicated, being focused in just a few centuries according to David Phillipson (1993:190, 2003; 
Maggs 1996).

Figure 5.4 Sites of the Chifumbaze complex in eastern and southern Africa. After 
Phillipson 1993.

The economy behind this spread, at least in its established phases, contained all the 
major domesticated animals and cereals of eastern Africa - cattle, sheep, goats, chicken, 
sorghum, pearl and finger millet. Whether or not these were all present in the earliest 
Urewe phase is less clear, but Phillipson (1993:188, 2003) believes that they probably 
were. Evidence for iron working is widespread, and of great importance since iron 
tools would have allowed very rapid forest clearance for agriculture. Furthermore, 
by the mid-first millennium AD, the Kenyan coast was coming within the range of 
trading networks across the Indian Ocean to Southwest Asia and India (Chami and 
Msemwa 1997), a circumstance which might have played no small role in the arrival 
in Africa of Southeast Asian crops such as bananas, taro, and the greater yam. The 
general lifestyle of these agricultural communities was clearly village-based, especially 
in coastal areas, but greater mobility with a stronger pastoral base developed in the 
drier inland regions in the south. In general, the whole Chifumbaze complex gives 
the appearance of being an agro-pastoral "package" with a high degree of cultural 
homogeneity, notwithstanding strong suggestions of incorporation of native Stone 
Age cultural traditions in inland regions (e.g., within the Nkope tradition in Zambia).

In terms of directionality, there is perhaps rather less agreement. David Phillipson 
favors expansion mainly down the eastern side of Africa, with separate Western and 
Eastern "facies" of the Chifumbaze complex. Christopher Ehret's (1998) reconstruction, based mainly on linguistic evidence, is similar to that of Phillipson. On the other 
hand, Thomas Huffman, while agreeing generally with Phillipson's concept of a 
Chifumbaze complex, gives more significance to a secondary spread of the Kalundu 
Tradition from the lower Congo basin and Angola after AD 100 (Huffman 1989a, 
1989b; Herbert and Huffman 1993; Huffman and Herbert 1996). A similar emphasis 
on this western tradition, but using the term "Western Stream" rather than Kalundu, 
is favored by James Denbow (1990). According to these scholars, this western stream 
met and mixed in southeastern Africa with the Kwale and Nkope variants of the 
Chifumbaze complex which had spread down through eastern Africa from Tanzania.

How such a hypothesis of two separate origins for southern African Bantuspeaking agriculturalists, derived from either side of the African continent, can be 
equated with the current distribution of the speakers of Western and Eastern Bantu 
languages is not clear (chapter 10). Currently, Western Bantu languages do not occur 
in southeastern Africa, as the Huffman and Denbow hypotheses might predict, so we 
must assume that they have been replaced by the present Eastern Bantu languages. 
This is an area of great uncertainty.'

By AD 500, the dispersal of agricultural village societies through eastern Africa had 
reached the limits of the summer rainfall belt in Natal. This limit still held when van 
Riebeeck planted the Dutch flag at Capetown in 1652. However, to the south and 
west, the fringes of the Kalahari and coastal southwestern Africa had witnessed an 
introduction of pottery by 2,000 years ago, and sheep herding by 1,600 years ago, but 
here with no associated agriculture. The introduction of pottery clearly occurred 
some centuries before any village agriculturalists reached this latitude, and there seems little doubt that the spread reflected the initiative of the native Khoi populations 
of southern Africa, presumably through connections with herders in Angola or southern 
Zambia (Sadr 1998; Bousman 1998). The pottery, which is generally pointed-based, 
shows no affinity to the Chifumbaze complex (Smith 1990; Maggs and Whitelaw 
1991; Sealy and Yates 1994). The significance of this is that an indigenous Khoisan 
hunter-gatherer population of southwestern Africa adopted pottery-making and sheep 
herding, thereafter remaining in control of their territories until colonial times, owing 
to the fortunate occurrence of a well-marked southern boundary to the summer rainfall 
belt upon which the farmers depended. Had southern Africa been entirely monsoonal 
in rainfall distribution the ultimate result would doubtless have been very different.

Let us now review the germs of an agricultural prehistory for the African continent:

1. With improving climatic conditions, a tradition of wild cereal harvesting (and 
cultivation?), together with the use of pottery, was spreading through many 
regions of Saharan and Nilotic Africa by 8000 BC. Some form of cattle management was under development in the eastern Sahara at the same time.

2. Around 5500 BC, the Fertile Crescent agropastoral economy was introduced into 
Egypt, leading presumably to an amalgamation of both African cattle herders 
and immigrant Levantine populations. At the same time, sheep and goats (and 
some West Asian cattle?) were introduced into other regions of northern Africa, 
such as the Red Sea Hills, via Egypt and possibly also via Arabia/Yemen and the 
Horn of Africa.

3. Herders moved south with the drying of the Sahara, triggering by 2000 BC the 
domestication of pearl millet in the Sahel and savanna zones. Herders also moved 
from Sudan into equatorial east Africa at about 2500 BC. Fertile Crescent crops 
reached the highlands of Ethiopia at an unknown date, but presumably before 
500 BC.

4. After 1000 BC, Bantu-speaking agricultural populations began to spread, in part 
with a knowledge of iron, from the vicinity of Lake Victoria through eastern and 
ultimately much of southern Africa. Other Bantu populations spread south through 
the rain forest into Angola. These spreads triggered an adoption of sheep herding 
by indigenous Khoisan populations in southern Africa about 2,000 years ago.

All of this is, of course, based essentially on archaeological evidence. Linguistic evidence provides more detail for the recent movements, much in reasonable concordance 
with the general sequence of events summarized above. As far as the archaeology is 
concerned, I will close by emphasizing how separate was the course toward farming 
in sub-Saharan Africa from that in Egypt and the Levant. The Sahara, even allowing 
for a warmer and wetter early Holocene climate, was clearly a barrier of immense 
proportions through which neither farmers nor their crops or animals were ever able 
to spread with ease. Again, the linguistic evidence, with an essential separation of 
Africans into speakers of Niger-Congo languages in the south and Afroasiatic languages 
in the north, separated roughly along the southern fringes of the Sahara by NiloSaharan languages (the early herders?), reinforces this conclusion very strongly.
