Chapter 6 - The Beginnings of Agriculture in East Asia
======================================================

First Farmers: The Origins of Agricultural Societies by Peter Bellwood
    
    
    
    
    
  

  

Chapter 6

The Beginnings of Agriculture in 

East Asia

In East Asia, the foci of interest as far as agricultural origins are concerned lie in the 
middle and lower basins of the Yellow (Huanghe) and Yangzi rivers, and the several 
smaller river basins, especially the Huai, that lie between them. Like central Africa 
and India, this is an area of monsoon rainfall that produced a range of domesticated 
summer cereals, of which rice has evolved into one of the most important foods in 
the world today (Figure 6.1). In general, this central riverine region of today's China 
has higher rainfall than Southwest Asia, with a strong and reliable monsoon, although 
temperature ranges through the year (hot summers, cool to cold winters) are close to 
those of Southwest Asia by virtue of the similar latitude.

In an overall sense, the agricultural history of central China has been blessed with 
greater fertility and less environmental degradation than that of Southwest Asia, 
hence the current massive population density of the region and the absence (so far) 
of any clear signs of Neolithic environmental damage. However, there are regions of 
water deficit and long dry season, especially north of the Yangzi and along the southeastern (Fujian) coastline, in the lee of the mountainous island of Taiwan (Figure 
6.2). Interestingly, Fujian and neighboring Guangdong are known to have been significant sources of population dispersal not only from Neolithic times onward, but 
especially during the recent centuries of the "Southern Chinese Diaspora" to Southeast Asia and further regions. The similarly dry region north of the Yangzi was the 
homeland of Chinese civilization and always a prolific source of both migrating 
populations and military aggrandizement since at least the Han Dynasty, 2,000 years 
ago (La Polla 2001).

Early agriculture in China appears to have been as revolutionary as that in Southwest Asia and its development followed a similar early Holocene chronology. Most 
early Neolithic sites in the middle Yellow valley are on alluvial terraces of fertile 
wind-blown loess, perfect for rain-fed millet cultivation, derived from Pleistocene glacial activity in the Asian interior. In the middle Yangzi basin, sites tend to be close 
to floodplain lakes, ideal for rice. But there are as yet very few archaeological sites 
that span the presumed period of transition into farming, prior to the appearance of 
multi-hectare agricultural villages at about 7000 BC. Furthermore, one aspect of the 
transition in East Asia differs from that in Southwest Asia, and this is the appearance 
of pottery well before any confirmed evidence for agriculture (as along the Sudan 
Nile and in parts of the Sahara). Claims are currently being made for Late Pleistocene 
occurrences of sherds with microblade industries in a number of sites in Japan and 
China (Underhill 1997; Yasuda ed. 2002; Keally 2003). Some of these occurrences of 
early pottery, as at Fukui Cave in Kyushu (southern Japan), Xianrendong and 
Diaotonghuan caves in Jiangxi, Zengpiyan Cave in Guangxi, and the open sites of 
Hutouliang and Nanzhuangtou in Hebei Province (Figure 6.3), are claimed to date to 
as early as 9000 to 12,000 BC.

These early pottery assemblages perhaps reflect the existence of a cuisine focused 
increasingly on the boiling of whole-grain millet and rice, initially wild, then domesticated, in warming postglacial climatic conditions. As in Southwest Asia, this was 
partly contemporary with a flour-based cuisine, to judge from the large numbers of 
grinding stones found in Chinese Late Paleolithic and Early Neolithic sites (Taketsugu 
1991; Lu 1998a). Many of the oldest well-documented Neolithic villages also have 
bones of domestic animals (pigs, dogs, and chickens), although dates for their initial 
domestications are by no means clear. Pigs are apparently not present in the oldest 
Neolithic sites in Manchuria (Jing and Flad 2002; Nelson 1995).

The East Asian occurrences of early pottery, in the north often associated with an 
industry of microblades struck from characteristic boat- or tongue-shaped cores, formed 
the backgrounds to two separate and rather different developments. These are most 
clearly expressed in Japan on the one hand, and in the Yellow and Yangzi basins of 
China on the other. In Jomon-period Japan, the archaeological record suggests 
continuation of mainly a hunting and gathering economy, albeit with some minor 
agricultural activity, with the use of pottery for over ten millennia. This is a situation 
in which affluent foragers showed a decided reluctance to adopt formal grain agriculture, despite its obvious availability after 7000 Bc in China and by 3500 BC in Korea. 
Jomon Japan presents a situation in which maritime exploitation and the harvesting 
of nuts and tubers were generally so successful that cereal agriculture, while certainly 
not entirely absent or unthought-of, was treated as something of an irrelevancy 
(Hudson 2003).' This remained the case in Japan until about 1000 Bc, a little prior 
to the period of major Yayoi population incursion from Korea (ca. 500 BC), when 
increasing signs of the adoption of rice cultivation appear in the Late Jomon record 
(Hudson 1999).

The Yellow and Yangzi situations were entirely different, for here the early pottery 
and microblade occurrences were apparently ancestral to the full Neolithic cultures 
that were developing by 7000 sc. Some of the microblades from the late Pleistocene 
site complex at Xiachuan in Shanxi Province even reveal an edge gloss, although it is 
unclear whether these tools served cereal-harvesting purposes similar to the flint sickles 
of Neolithic Southwest Asia (Lu 1998a). Even so, microblades continue to occur in small numbers in some early Neolithic sites in central China, in both the Yellow and 
Yangzi basins. Along the Yellow River they are sufficiently common in some regions 
to suggest a continuity in technological terms from Late Paleolithic into Neolithic, 
although they cease to occur in some of the major millet-cultivating early villages. If 
they were indeed reaping knives, their functions were taken over in many of the 
Neolithic villages by knives of polished stone, shell, pottery, or bone. South of the Yangzi Basin, microblades are much less common and tend to be outnumbered by 
the products of pebble-based industries. Occurrences of microblades far to the south 
at Xiqiaoshan in Guangdong Province and Bukit Tengkorak in Sabah are later in date 
and it is simply uncertain at this stage if these can be linked to any of the more 
northerly occurrences.

Figure 6.3 The locations of major archaeological sites discussed in the text, with the 
distributions of millet and rice remains.

There is no evidence for primary agricultural development in any other regions of 
China outside the middle portions of the Yellow, Huai, and Yangzi basins, even though 
southern China was believed for many years to have been the homeland for rice 
domestication (T. T. Chang 1976). This remained so until modern archaeological and 
paleoclimatic data became available to highlight the deep significance of the Yangzi 
Basin (Glover and Higham 1996; Lu et al. 2002). Claims for very early Holocene 
agriculture associated with pebble tools in southern Chinese limestone caves have 
not been convincing to date, and current evidence suggests that rice farming spread 
into Guangxi about 4500 BC (Tracey Lu, Chinese University of Hong Kong, pers. 
comm.).

New research, however, hints that significant material south of the Yangzi might 
be eluding discovery. The caves of Xianrendong and Diaotonghuan, about 150 km 
south of the Yangzi in northeastern Jiangxi Province, have an appearance of wild rice 
phytoliths in their deposits at about 11,000 BC. This Terminal Pleistocene appearance 
was followed by an absence of rice during the ensuing cold phase of the Younger 
Dryas, then by a return of rice phytoliths, now claimed to be partly from a domesticated population, at about 8000-9000 BC (Figure 6.4) (Zhao 1998; Lu et al. 2002). 
The absence of rice phytoliths during the Younger Dryas reinforces the important 
observation that we are here right on the northern edge of the range of wild rice 
distribution, a circumstance that in itself could have been crucial in the shift to 
domesticated rice, particularly if the transition reflected rapid fluctuations in supply owing to climatic oscillations (Yan 1992, 2002; Bettinger et al. 1994; Bellwood 1996b; 
Cohen 1998).

Figure 6.4 Trends in rice exploitation in Diaotonghuan cave, northern Jiangxi, based on 
analysis of Oryza phytoliths by Zhao Zhiyun. Zone G is dated to ca. 11,000 BC, Zone E to 
ca. 8000-9000 Bc, Zone D to ca. 7000 Bc, and Zone C to ca. 6000 sc. From Zhao 1998.

The inhabitants of these two Jiangxi caves also used round-based and cord-marked 
pottery, without tripods or ring feet, perhaps as early as 9000 BC.' Pig and chicken 
bones are present, most likely from wild populations in the lower layers of 
Diaotonghuan, but probably domesticated later. Ground stone axes and arrowheads 
appear at about 7000 BC. Yuchanyan Cave in Hunan Province, to the southwest of 
Xianrendong, has also produced rice remains and pottery dating prior to 8000 BC 
(Chen 1999). But apart from these cave discoveries, information on the actual 
transition phase into agriculture in China is still sparse.

Far away on the northern side of the Yangzi and Yellow basins lie the fertile 
agricultural landscapes of Manchuria (especially Liaoning and Jilin), homeland of 
China's Qing rulers (1644 to 1911) and an important player in the debate to be 
reviewed in chapter 10 about the origins of the Altaic languages. The paleobotanical 
record for early agriculture here is sparse, but Gideon Shelach (2000) is a strong 
advocate for an independent development of plant cultivation in Manchuria. My 
own view is that a contemporary and linked development of millet cultivation 
occurred in both the Yellow Basin and Manchuria prior to 6000 BC, while allowing 
that the early Neolithic of Manchuria (Xinglongwa culture, ca. 6200-5400 BC) is 
rather different in style from its central Chinese contemporaries. Possibly, native 
hunter-gatherers here adopted agriculture on the far northern edge of its range, as in 
Europe and northern Japan (Nelson 1995; Hudson 1999). This region was also the 
source for the first farmers of the Korean Peninsula, who arrived there with millets 
by the commencement of the Chulmun pottery phase, prior to 3500 BC. Rice arrived 
later in Korea, perhaps being transmitted by sea from eastern China (Bale 2001; 
Crawford and Lee 2003).

First Farmers: The Origins of Agricultural Societies by Peter Bellwood
    
    
    
    
    
  

  

Environmental Factors and the Domestication Process 

in China

The oldest full Neolithic villages in China with undisputed evidence of agriculture, 
in both the Yellow and the Yangzi basins, date to about 7000/6500 BC. By this time, 
climates were similar to those of the present and postglacial sea level had reached 
about 10 meters below the present one. Between 6000 and 2000 BC, the sea level 
peaked above the present level and then began to drop again. Average annual temperatures in the Yellow and Yangzi basins rose to slightly above those of the present 
and summer monsoon rainfall increased, as revealed by animal distributions and 
pollen studies (Zhang and Wang 1998; Lu 1998a).

The oldest sites with evidence for agriculture occur in the zone of mid-Holocene 
overlap between the geographical distributions of wild rice and foxtail millet, from 
the Yangzi northward through the Huai Valley toward the Yellow River (Figure 6.3). 
Wild rice Oryza rufipogon, progenitor of the domesticated Oryza sativa, grew during 
the mid-Holocene climatic optimum to as far north as the Huai. The Yellow Basin, however, had winters too cold and dry for rice to flourish. Here, on the loess soils 
drained by the Yellow River and its tributaries, the two most significant wild cereals 
were the progenitors of the domesticated millets, Setaria italica (foxtail millet) and 
the less important but more drought-resistant Panicum miliaceum (broomcorn millet). 
Both foxtail and broomcorn millet are reported widely in the Neolithic cultures of 
eastern Europe and the western Eurasian steppes, but how this relates to their 
contemporary presence in China is unknown. It would appear that northern China 
still has the oldest dates for their cultivation, from about 6500 BC onward.

Exactly how these crops came to be domesticated and planted in an annual agricultural round is unclear, but a likely scenario reads as follows. As in Southwest Asia, 
the practice of replanting to maintain or increase supplies of cereals must have developed either during or soon after the Younger Dryas, particularly in "edge-of-range" 
areas subject to sharp fluctuations in supply. If planting of seed stocks occurred in 
new territories away from the zones of wild distribution, as hypothesized for Southwest Asia, then each year the relative proportion of naturally non-shattering grain in 
the crop could have increased, especially if a few panicles were partly ripe at the time 
of harvest and if the harvesting was by cutting with a knife/sickle or by uprooting. 
Such a trend would have been assisted by the tendency of wild foxtail millet (Setaria 
viridis) to ripen over a very drawn-out period of up to four months, such that many 
stands when harvested might be expected to have contained some grain already ripe, 
amongst which there would be some which had the genotype for non-shattering 
(Lu 1998b; 2002). Under such circumstances it is not hard to imagine strong selective 
pressures coming into effect.

Once planting and seed selection began the whole system would have become 
locked into a snowball of no return, with a rapid domination of non-shattering seed 
stock, reduction of glume toughness due to winter storage, and a trend toward 
synchronous ripening, exactly as in the Levant. Indeed, we have no evidence to 
suggest that the overall sequence of events leading to cereal domestication in China 
need have been different from that in the Levant. Even the Younger Dryas could 
have played a similar role in inducing a commitment to planting. But demonstration 
and proof are elusive indeed.

One problem with the above scenario is that, as noted in chapter 3, quick selection 
for non-shattering seeds requires use of a sickle or knife, or uprooting. In the rice 
zone centered on the Yangzi, we lack any pre-agricultural examples of potential 
harvesting knives, unless some of the rare microblade discoveries can be placed in 
this category. Such tools are also rare in the oldest rice-zone Neolithic villages 
(Pengtoushan, Hemudu layer 4), so here the processes of change are harder to 
visualize. Quite possibly the rice plants were simply uprooted, and a layer up to one 
meter thick at Hemudu, containing enormous quantities of rice stalks and leaves, 
suggests that this might have occurred. Whatever the answer, rice appears to have 
been first domesticated right on the northern edge of its distributional range, in the 
middle Yangzi and Huai valleys, suggesting, as noted above, that environmentally 
induced fluctuations in supply were perhaps more important than they were for the 
hardier millets. Indeed, it seems possible that the domestication process actually began with rice and spread later to the millets, but this cannot yet be demonstrated 
with certainty. My own feeling is that rice domestication is likely to have preceded 
that of the millets, and indeed might have stimulated the latter as farming populations 
tried moved north (Bellwood 1995, in press).

Another area of uncertainty concerns the issue of variation within Oryza sativa. 
Were the oldest cultivated rices along the Yangzi ancestral to both the japonica (shortgrained) and indica (long-grained) varieties of modern rice, as suggested by Zhang 
Wenxu (2002)? Were they ancestral just to japonica and was indica domesticated 
separately somewhere to the south, in northeastern India or Thailand perhaps, as 
suggested by Yo-Ichiro Sato (1999)? Or was japonica rice domesticated along the 
Huai and indica along the Yangzi, as suggested by Zhang and Wang (1998)? Many 
possibilities are being suggested,' and the issue is important because it can reflect on 
the possibility that domesticated Asian rice has more than one homeland. The archaeological likelihood that native indica rices were domesticated in northeast India should 
not be taken lightly, but this need not mean that the domestication process was 
entirely independent of that for the japonica rices in China. A totally independent 
domestication of rice in India or Mainland Southeast Asia, given current chronologies, 
seems unlikely, but this need not imply that other wild races, apart from those native 
to the Yangzi, were never domesticated.

First Farmers: The Origins of Agricultural Societies by Peter Bellwood
    
    
    
    
    
  

  

The Archaeology of Early Agriculture in China

Were rice and the millets domesticated within one cultural system, or separately? 
Rice is present in large quantities by soon after 7000 BC in the Peiligang culture site of 
Jiahu in the Huai valley, Henan Province, this being a site with a material culture 
that falls within the Yellow River millet-based tradition (Zhang and Wang 1998; 
Lu 1998a; Chen 1999). Thus, there is clear overlap in the distributions of the two sets 
of cereals. Two completely separate origins of agriculture in China are counterindicated by this pattern. A single center, albeit large and diffuse, seems far more 
likely (Cohen 2003).

Turning now to the early Neolithic archaeological record, non-readers of Chinese 
luckily have the masterly 1986 summary of the situation by the late K. C. Chang 
(Chang Kwang-chih), now a little out of date but still very thorough in its presentation. In the first two editions of this book (1963 and 1968), Chang presented his view 
that the southern and eastern Chinese Neolithic developed as a result of "Lungshanoid" 
diffusion from a Yangshao / Longshan agricultural and Neolithic heartland in the North 
China plain (the Zhongyuan), located around the junctions of the Yellow, Wei, and 
Fen rivers, where the oldest millet-bearing sites occur. At that time, before the early 
Yangzi rice-bearing sites were discovered, a Zhongyuan cultural origin was postulated for the whole Chinese Neolithic, and the Lungshanoid was perceived in terms 
of a secondary dispersal of populations with rice cultivation, stone adzes, and reaping 
knives, and a set of specific pottery forms (including tripod vessels) to as far south as 
Guangdong.

By the time of Chang's third edition (1977), archaeology was entering an antidiffusionist and anti-historical phase. Chang was now beginning to regard the 
Lungshanoid more as a result of interaction than of diffusion or population dispersal 
from a heartland region. The most recent fourth edition (1986) maintains this view, 
wherein the Lungshanoid is seen purely as a convergence phenomenon between an 
array of later Neolithic cultures located across southern and eastern China during the 
fourth millennium BC. Interestingly, however, there are hints in a 1996 paper that 
Chang might have been returning to almost his original views just prior to his death 
in 2001, owing to the new Yangzi early rice discoveries, since he was suggesting that 
the Neolithic cultures of southern China and Taiwan could have had a Yangzi origin 
linked to an actual population dispersal (Chang and Goodenough 1996). By this time, 
the concept of central China as a large region of early agriculture involving both rice 
and millets, rather than merely a Yellow River (Yangshao) source with millets only in 
the first instance, was rapidly becoming more widely accepted.

I have to state at the outset that I believe Chang was generally correct in his early 
interpretations in the 1960s, even if some of the Yangzi early rice details were still 
unimagined at that time. I suspect also that we were both in accord in our views 
during the late 1990s, since I had many occasions to talk with him during visits to 
Taipei in connection with my research on Austronesian origins. The reason why 
Late Neolithic China became such a cozy club of cultural interaction at about 3500 ac 
is because the cultures concerned were already culturally and historically closely 
related, and probably shared an ultimate common regional origin at the beginning of 
the Neolithic, at 6500 BC or before. This does not mean that the Chinese Neolithic 
evolved from one small ancestral society, but it does mean that it evolved within a 
region characterized by a high degree of communication and interaction, perhaps 
focused on a chain of quite closely related ethnolinguistic populations.

First Farmers: The Origins of Agricultural Societies by Peter Bellwood
    
    
    
    
    
  

  

The Archaeological Record of the Early Neolithic in the Yellow and 

Yangzi Basins

The archaeological record of the Yellow River points toward an oldest appearance of 
the Neolithic at about 6500 BC, amongst a group of sites located along the eastern 
foothills of the highlands that form the western edge of the North China Plain. Other 
sites were perhaps also located around the edge of the Shandong highlands, at that 
time either an island or linked to the mainland by swamps and marshes. Annual temperatures at this time were 2-4°C above the present and summer growing-season 
rainfall might have been a little higher than now. The loess soils of the Yellow valley 
were capable of supporting permanent agriculture when sufficient moisture was 
present; loess also has a self-fertilizing propensity, bringing up mineral nutrients by 
capillary action. Under such conditions, according to Ho (1975), millet agriculture could 
have supported at least 400 people per square kilometer on a fairly permanent basis.

The oldest Yellow River Neolithic sites formed a continuum with four internal 
clusters, two centered respectively around the major sites of Cishan and Peiligang (Figure 6.3), with two smaller groups in the Wei and upper Han valleys. Related but 
slightly later sites occurred as far west as eastern Gansu (Dadiwan culture), and as far 
east as Shandong (Houli and Beixin cultures). All the sites of the core region centered 
around Cishan and Peiligang date between 6500 and 5000 sc. They usually cover 
between one and two hectares, and they often occur at high densities (e.g., 54 
Peiligang-type sites, all under 6 hectares, in an area of 17 by 20 kilometers in central 
Henan, according to Li Liu 1996:267). Houses were round or square with sunken 
floors, interspersed with storage pits. Over 300 such pits occurred at Cishan, 80 with 
millet remains, with a total millet storage capacity estimated for the site of about 
100,000 kilograms of grain (Yan 1992). Polished stone axes and serrated stone or shell 
reaping knives, plus pestles and mortars with four short legs, all attest to an agricultural 
economy, combined with the keeping of pigs, dogs, and chickens and the collection 
of considerable quantities of nuts (walnuts, hazelnuts, and Celtis seeds). Some sites 
have cemeteries of extended burials, reinforcing the obvious hints of large and densely 
concentrated populations.

The pottery of these northern cultures is remarkably alike, and includes simple forms 
of cord-marked, combed, fingertip-impressed, or incised vessels (even some painted), 
often on tripods or pedestals. While there are minor cultural differences over the large 
area represented by these sites, given the overall homogeneity of pattern it is not too 
hard to visualize a common ancestral form of culture, located quite close in time, 
from which all these descendant cultures of the Yellow River Basin originated.

Southerly sites of this group, for instance Lijiacun in the upper Han Valley, often 
contain small quantities of rice as well as millet (Wu 1996). Jiahu in Henan, a Huai 
basin site with a material culture very close to that of the Peiligang culture, is especially important, as already noted, because it actually appears to have had a rice-based 
economy. Dated to between 7000 and 5800 BC, Jiahu possibly covered 5.5 hectares, 
with sunken floored houses in Peiligang style, a cemetery, pottery kilns, and a Peiligang 
polished stone industry including axes, reaping knives, and typical Peiligang stone 
mortars on four low legs. The site also has evidence for domesticated pig, dog, and 
(claimed) cattle; for rice-tempered, cord-marked, and sometimes red-slipped pottery 
(with some possible sign precursors for later Chinese writing); and quantities of rice 
husks, grains, and phytoliths (Zhang and Wang 1998; Li et al. 2003). Some of the 
pottery resembles that from Pengtoushan, a rice-based site in the middle Yangzi 
Basin, to which we turn below. This is of course extremely significant - Jiahu has 
two faces, one facing north, one south. It renders untenable the idea that the millets 
and rice were domesticated by separate communities living in splendid isolation.

It is, of course, the recent discoveries located in the lakelands to the immediate 
south of the middle Yangzi Valley that have revolutionized our understanding of 
Neolithic China. The one-hectare site of Pengtoushan near the shoreline of Lake 
Dongting was founded around 7000 BC, perhaps slightly earlier than any of the milletbased sites of the Yellow River, although the available chronologies still lack the 
refinement to make this certain (Hunan 1990; Yan 1991). Its layers, 3 to 4 meters 
thick, contain traces of sand-floored houses, cord-marked and red-slipped pottery 
with rice-husk tempers, and fairly simple flaked lithics. Reaping knives and mortars of the Peiligang type are absent, the latter perhaps because rice was normally boiled 
in pots and eaten as a whole-grain food rather than ground into flour (Fujimoto 
1983).

Another rice-bearing site at Bashidang, located about 25 kilometers north of 
Pengtoushan, covered 3 hectares and contained a mixture of houses with sunken 
floors, ground-level floors, and even pile constructions, together with a starfishshaped earthen ceremonial platform and a defensive ditch (Hunan 1996; Chen 1999; 
Yasuda 2000). Bashidang also belongs to the Pengtoushan culture (7000 to 5500 Bc), 
and is stated to contain wooden spade blades and unspecified tools of bone, wood, 
and bamboo. Chen Xingcan (1999) notes the presence of pottery features found 
also in the Peiligang culture and in Jiahu. Bashidang has yielded bones of possibly 
domesticated pigs, dogs, chicken, and cattle, and prolific rice remains (over 15,000 
grains).

Presumably, the rice eaten in these early Neolithic sites in the middle Yangzi was 
grown in wet swampy fields of some kind, close to lakes and river banks. Water 
caltrop and lotus roots were also grown, like rice both water-loving plants. Although 
no fields have survived from early Neolithic times, new discoveries at Chengtoushan 
and Caoxieshan, near Pengtoushan, have yielded remains of small bunded rice fields 
dating from about 4500-3000 Bc, these being so far the oldest actual rice field remains 
discovered in China (He 1999).

According to Yan Wenming (1992), the majority of the earliest rice-yielding sites 
known in China are located in the middle and lower Yangzi Basin. Here, we undoubtedly have at least one origin region for rice cultivation, perhaps the only one. 
The "heartland" of East Asian agriculture, extending from the Yangzi to the Yellow 
rivers and incorporating the Pengtoushan and Peiligang/Jiahu foci for both rice and 
the millets, has given rise to the dispersal of the ancestors of almost half of the 
world's modern population.

First Farmers: The Origins of Agricultural Societies by Peter Bellwood
    
    
    
    
    
  

  

Later Developments (post-5000 ec) in the Chinese Neolithic

By 5000 BC, the Yellow and Yangzi basins were well populated with Neolithic settlements (as this book goes to press, Chinese archaeologists are preparing publications on new sites in the lower Yangzi, with rice cultivation and pile dellings prior 
to 6000 Bc). What kind of cultural relationships can we see now? Are traces of a 
common regional origin for Chinese Neolithic cultures still evident?

The distributions of the major Chinese Neolithic traditions between 5000 and 
3000 Bc are shown in Figure 6.5. In the north, the best-known tradition of this period, 
the Yangshao, was a direct descendant of the Peiligang culture. Also, with little doubt, 
it was a major (if not the major) direct ancestor of the Han Chinese cultural and 
linguistic tradition with its 4,000-year dynastic history. Yangshao sites occupy a large 
area of the middle Yellow River and its tributaries, stretching from Hebei westward 
to Gansu. Sites are large, with major excavated villages such as Banpocun, Jiangzhai, 
and Beishouling covering between 5 and 6 hectares, considerably larger than the average for the preceding Peiligang culture. The fine details of Yangshao assemblages 
are not of direct concern here, but village plans, cemeteries, and pottery kilns all 
attest complex, possibly even ranked, societies with developed technology. Yangshao 
people also had a system of notation, often scratched on pot rims, which might have 
been in part ancestral to the Old Chinese script of the Shang dynasty (ca. 1300 Bc).

East of the Yangshao we enter the zone of the Dawenkou tradition of Shandong. 
The first phases of this tradition, termed Houli and Beixin (ca. 6000-4500 ac), were 
very closely related to the Peiligang culture in pottery forms and may be regarded as 
an eastern extension of the latter. Thus, the succeeding Dawenkou culture proper 
(ca. 4500-2500 Be), which extends westward into central Henan and virtually meets 
the eastern limit of the Yangshao (Figure 6.5), can be regarded as sharing a high 
degree of common origin with the latter. Like the Yangshao, both the Beixin and 
Dawenkou cultures were based on millet production rather than rice. Dawenkou 
settlements are large, with cemeteries and similar indications of social complexity 
to the Yangshao (Pearson 1981). Interestingly, the burials sometimes show cranial 
deformation and removal of upper lateral incisors, the latter being a characteristic 
of several early Neolithic assemblages to the south, in the lower Yangzi region 
(Majiabang), Fujian (Tanshishan), and Taiwan (Beinan). Dawenkou pottery lacks 
paddle impression and is mainly plain or red-slipped, characterized by angular vessel 
forms which often have high pedestals with cut-out decoration. Symbols are also 
found on Dawenkou pottery that might be related to the notational system used by 
the Yangshao people.

Thus, the Dawenkou tradition may be seen as a potential link between the Yangshao 
tradition of the inland Yellow River and the Neolithic panoply of cultures that 
extends down the eastern coastline of China, to as far as Guangdong and Taiwan. 
During the fifth millennium BC these coastal cultures included the Majiabang of the 
Yangzi delta region, with the slightly older Hemudu culture immediately to its south 
in Zhejiang. The Daxi culture and its predecessors (Zaoshi/Chengbeixi and 
Tangjiagang) occupied the middle Yangzi, and, by perhaps 3500 Be, the Dapenkeng 
culture was established in Taiwan and coastal Fujian (Figure 6.5).

First Farmers: The Origins of Agricultural Societies by Peter Bellwood
    
    
    
    
    
  

  

South of the Yangzi - Hemudu and Majiabang

The Hemudu culture, to the south of Hangzhou Bay, was one of the most dramatic 
discoveries by Chinese archaeologists during the 1970s. Prior to the discovery of 
Pengtoushan, Hemudu was the oldest rice-bearing site in China, dated at its base to 
5000 Be. The oldest Hemudu pottery (from the basal layer 4) is fairly unusual in the 
Chinese context since it lacks ring feet and tripods. It is possible that it represents the 
incorporation into the rice-growing Neolithic landscape of a group not immediately 
derivable from the other cultural regions along the middle Yangzi, further upstream. 
Interestingly, portable pottery stoves occur in this culture, similar to a more recent 
tradition of pottery stoves still used on boats by "sea nomads" in the islands of 
Southeast Asia (especially in the southern Philippines and northern Borneo). Hemudu 
people therefore had links with coastal maritime cousins. Sites of Hemudu type occur on offshore islands in northern Zhejiang, attesting development of a raft or 
canoe technology (wooden paddles have been found in Hemudu itself).

Hemudu is of extreme importance because of the sheer quantity of material culture 
recovered, some with remarkable parallels in later cultures across the Pacific, a circumstance perhaps not totally coincidental. The site was located in a marshy zone close 
to the sea, and waterlogging has led to excellent preservation of organic remains. 
The most striking items include stepped and shouldered stone adzes with knee-shaped 
wooden handles, bone spades, pottery spindle whorls, bamboo matting, foundations 
for long timber houses raised on piles with mortise and tenon joinery (identical to 
joinery found in Majiabang sites, below),' and pieces of bone carved with zoned 
geometric and curvilinear patterns. Pig, dog, and perhaps water buffalo were domesticated and their droppings have been found in the site. In one 400-square-meter area 
a layer of rice husks and plant debris up to one meter thick was found, evidently the 
remains of an ancient threshing floor. According to Yan Wenming (1991, 1992), the 
site yielded rice remains equivalent to 120,000 kilograms of fresh grain.

Above the basal layer 4 at Hemudu comes layer 3, with pottery like that from 
Majiabang, a site a little further to the north near Shanghai. The Majiabang culture 
lies immediately south of the Dawenkou and was culturally quite close to it, as was 
its Songze cultural successor, both dating overall to 5000-3000 BC. Majiabang pottery 
has tripods and pedestals, is sometimes red-slipped but rarely cord-marked. It resembles 
Beixin and Dawenkou pottery fairly closely but is less obviously related to that from 
Peiligang and Yangshao, as one would expect from the greater degree of geographical 
separation. Majiabang sites have alluvial or lake-edge locations, suitable for the ricegrowing economy of this culture (rice husks were also commonly used to temper 
pottery).

The Hemudu-Majiabang sequence thus incorporated the results of contacts from 
at least two directions. The rice-growing economy was presumably brought down 
the Yangzi or Huai, whereas some of the pottery features of rice-growing Majiabang 
reflect contacts with millet-growing Shandong to the north. Such linkages suggest 
that by 5000 BC, if not before, all of the rice and millet-growing cultures of central 
China, from the middle Yangzi to the environs of Beijing, were interrelated by contacts visible through their farming economies and pottery styles, just as they were 
a thousand years earlier through the intermediacy of Jiahu. The significance of 
a cultural ancestry founded in an original Peiligang-Jiahu-Pengtoushan Neolithic 
heartland of the seventh millennium BC will later become evident.

First Farmers: The Origins of Agricultural Societies by Peter Bellwood
    
    
    
    
    
  

  

The spread of agriculture south of Zhejiang

Turning now to the Neolithic archaeological record south of Zhejiang, it is necessary 
first to recap on a few observations made above. The Neolithic cultures examined 
so far, in the Yangzi and Yellow Valleys, as well on the coasts of Shandong, Jiangsu, 
and Zhejiang, show a great deal of intertwining in economy and style, with the most 
"idiosyncratic" perhaps being that represented in the basal layer 4 at Hemudu, a 
factor which could in part be due to the superb level of preservation and sheer quantity of material in this site. By 5000 BC, other indications of regionalism in 
artifact style were undoubtedly starting to appear, and we may expect that by this 
time there was a separation forming into a Sinitic tradition to the north of the Yangzi 
(Yangshao and Dawenkou cultures) and a non-Sinitic tradition to the south, ancestral 
to many of the cultural minority populations of present-day southern China (Hemudu, 
Majiabang, Zaoshi, and Daxi cultures).

The expansion of Neolithic cultures through southern China seems to have reflected 
two axes (Figure 6.5). One extended from the Zaoshi, Tangjiagang, and Daxi cultural 
spheres (ca. 5000 to 3000 ac) of the Middle Yangzi lake district, running southward 
along river valleys to Guangdong (including Hong Kong) and Hainan. The other 
extended down the coastline with its myriad offshore islands formed as a result of 
the postglacial sea-level rise, from Zhejiang to Fujian, Guangdong, and Taiwan. The 
latter spread appears to have been roughly contemporary with the westerly Zaoshi/ 
Daxi-influenced spread and was probably fueled in part by the succession of ricegrowing cultures in the Shanghai / Hangzhou Bay region. Taiwan, with its Austronesian 
heritage, belongs in my view to this latter tradition, while the inland axis represents 
that which spread the oldest Neolithic assemblages into Hong Kong, Vietnam, and 
Thailand.

As far as the eastern stream of Neolithic spread southward is concerned, the 
Majiabang culture of the Shanghai region had developed into the Songze culture by 
4000 Bc. Songze pottery is characterized by a continuing presence of tripods and high 
pedestals, many of the latter with decorative cut-outs.' There is a continuation of 
red-slipping, incised decoration, and cord-marking, as there is in the poorly dated 
Tanshishan culture to the south in Fujian, which may be derived from the Songze. In 
northern Guangdong, the site of Shixia reveals the oldest dated presence of rice so far 
in southeastern mainland China, in plentiful quantities, at about 3000 Bc. The Shixia 
pottery resembles that of both Songze and the following jade-rich Liangzhu culture 
in the lower Yangzi delta region (ca. 3300-2300 Bc; Huang 1992), and Shixia has also 
produced jade bracelets, rings, and earrings of Liangzhu type. All of this suggests to 
Charles Higham (1996a, 2003) that the spread of rice cultivation down the Chinese 
coast through Fujian into Taiwan, and into northern Guangdong, had occurred by 
3000 BC.

Currently, the earliest Neolithic sites in Guangdong and Hong Kong appear to lack 
evidence for rice and to have a fabric tradition emphasizing the use of barkcloth, 
beaten with distinctive grooved beaters, rather than of textile fibers spun with spindle 
whorls and woven on a loom. Charles Higham (1996a:79) regards these assemblages 
as the handiwork of hunters and gatherers ("affluent foragers"). I am not so sure of 
this, since these earlier sites are numerous, prolific in material culture, often located 
near good rice-growing soils, and certainly not suggestive of any continuity from the 
preceding Hoabinhian pebble tool complex. There are strong hints amongst them of 
a level of population density that we would associate with farming, commencing by 
perhaps 4000 BC. Given recent findings of plentiful rice and millet remains in sites of 
this period in southern Taiwan (chapter 7), further research is required, especially in 
the examination of soil samples for phytoliths of rice and other crops.

The oldest Neolithic sites in Hong Kong and the Pearl Delta (for instance, 
Xiantouling, Dahuangsha, Hac Sa Wan, Sham Wan, and Chung Hom Wan) date 
between 4200 and 3000 sc, and comprise numerous coastal midden-like deposits on 
sandy soils, up to about 1.5 hectares in size (Meacham 1978, 1984-85, 1994; Chau 
1993; Chen 1996; Yang 1999). Their painted and incised pottery styles resemble the 
contemporary Tangjiagang and Daxi pottery complexes of the Middle Yangzi, as well 
as the Shixia assemblage further north in Guangdong. They are generally associated 
with stepped and shouldered stone adzes, and they also contain large numbers of 
barkcloth beaters. Bill Meacham (1995:450) thinks these populations all grew rice and 
I tend to agree with him, but the evidence is currently very fugitive. The economy of 
the earliest Neolithic in far southern China still remains something of a mystery, and 
we will probably have to settle, in the final resort, for a mosaic pattern of regional 
crop dominances, from rice through to tubers (particularly taro) and tree products.

In general, the pre-Neolithic assemblages of southern China and Mainland Southeast Asia belong to a pebble-tool tradition known as the Hoabinhian, a complex of 
assemblages found very widely in caves and shell middens that extends back into the 
Pleistocene and which is clearly indigenous to the region. Although many archaeologists have attempted in the past to show that the Hoabinhian underwent an in situ 
transformation to agriculture, no convincing demonstration of this interesting possibility has ever been presented. Occasional occurrences of sherds of cord-marked 
pottery in the upper layers of caves probably reflect disturbance, and although the 
Hoabinhians were clearly plant users and perhaps even plant managers, we have no 
indication that they ever developed systematic field agriculture (Bellwood 1997b; 
Higham 1996a; Higham and Thosarat 1998a). Southern China, together with the 
mainland and island regions of Southeast Asia, belongs to a zone of strong and 
clear-cut Neolithic spread. Only when we move as far east as New Guinea, as we do 
in the next chapter, does the fundamental picture change.
