Chapter 7 - The Spread of Agriculture into Southeast Asia and Oceania
=====================================================================

First Farmers: The Origins of Agricultural Societies by Peter Bellwood
    
    
    
    
    
  

  

Chapter 7

The Spread of Agriculture into 

Southeast Asia and Oceania

I must confess to having some degree of vested interest in the contents of this 
chapter since my research career has been spent in the region of concern. Hence I 
make no apology for presenting a basic summary of views which I have published 
elsewhere,' together with acknowledgments of counter-views where such seem necessary. In terms of environment, history, language, and biology, over the long term, 
we have essentially three regions of concern, all of course overlapping greatly in 
environmental and historical context but nevertheless being coherently identifiable. 
These regions are Mainland Southeast Asia (Burma across to Vietnam and West 
Malaysia), Island Southeast Asia (Taiwan, Philippines, Indonesia, East Malaysia, 
Brunei), and Oceania - the islands of the Pacific Ocean from New Guinea eastward 
(Figure 7.1). The latter are normally divided into the regions termed Melanesia, 
Micronesia, and Polynesia, although in recent years a tradition, started by Roger 
Green (1991), has developed of using the term Near Oceania for the islands to as far 
east as the Solomons, and Remote Oceania for those beyond. Pleistocene huntergatherers reached the islands of Near Oceania over 30,000 years ago, but only 
Austronesian agriculturalists were able to reach the islands of Remote Oceania, and 
only within the past 3,500 years.

Within this vast region, only the New Guinea Highlands have yielded data suggestive of independent agricultural origins. The other regions of Southeast Asia and Near 
Oceania, excluding the New Guinea Highlands, reflect varying degrees of agricultural 
spread through landscapes previously settled by hunter-gatherers, in extremely complex trajectories. Descendants of some of the earlier populations still survive as huntergatherers today, particularly amongst lowland sago gatherers in New Guinea (Roscoe 
2002), and as the Negritos (Semang and Agta) of the Malay Peninsula and Luzon 
(Figure 2.5). Even where they no longer survive as discrete hunter-gatherer populations, the genes of some of these former inhabitants are still present in many 
regions.

This is significant because, as in Europe, questions arise for Southeast Asia as to the 
contribution of indigenous hunter-gatherer populations to the eventual agricultural 
mosaic. Such contributions, especially in a purely genetic sense, are still visible and 
important today in the Malay Peninsula, parts of the Philippines and eastern Indonesia, and in Island Melanesia. In terms of material culture and language, however, it is 
my impression that continuity from the pre-agricultural past has not been particularly 
strong, except in Near Oceania and amongst some of the groups who continued a 
hunting and gathering lifestyle into the recent past (see chapter 2).

First Farmers: The Origins of Agricultural Societies by Peter Bellwood
    
    
    
    
    
  

  

The Background to Agricultural Dispersal in Southeast Asia

To understand the creation of a human cultural kaleidoscope on the scale of Southeast Asia, we need first an awareness of some of the major environmental factors. 
The whole region is tropical, but there is decreasing dry season length as one moves 
into the equatorial zone between 5° degrees north and south, within which rain falls 
during much of the year (Figure 6.2). Equatorial populations tend to be small, and in 
eastern Indonesia often dependent for subsistence on tubers and tree crops such as 
yams, taro, sago, and bananas. The equatorial zone with its ever-wet rain forest is not 
especially suitable for rice agriculture (Figure 6.1), and in prehistoric times it would 
appear that rice and foxtail millet were gradually dropped from the roster of cultivated plants as agricultural populations moved through this zone and eastward into 
Oceania. According to Robert Dewar (2003), unreliable rainfall regimes in southern 
Taiwan and the northern Philippines could also have filtered out annual cereals in 
favor of crops with less seasonal rainfall requirements, such as taro and other tubers 
(see also Paz 2003). Today, and presumably also in the agricultural past, the greatest 
population densities occur in the monsoon regions where rainfall distribution is 
reliable and where rice can flourish, especially in alluvial landscapes in southern 
China, northern Mainland Southeast Asia, parts of the Philippines, Java, Bali, and 
the Lesser Sundas.

Nowhere in Southeast Asia is there currently any good evidence for a presence 
of any form of food production before 3500 BC. This is significant, given that rice was 
well domesticated by at least 6500 Bc along the Yangzi. As with the movement of 
agriculture from Southwestern Asia into India, so in Mainland Asia we also see an 
apparent slowing down, in this case apparently caused by cross-latitudinal movement 
and perhaps hunter-gatherer resistance, rather than by any crossing into a completely 
different rainfall regime (both China and Southeast Asia are part of the same 
monsoonal summer rainfall belt). Once on the move, however, Neolithic complexes 
with pottery, polished stone adzes, shell ornaments, spindle whorls, backcloth beaters, and presumed-domesticated bovids, pigs, and dogs replaced the older huntergatherer archaeological complexes of the early and mid-Holocene with orderly 
precision, generally moving down a north-south axis from southern China through 
Mainland Southeast Asia toward the Malay Peninsula, and through Taiwan and the 
Philippines toward Indonesia! Within the Indonesian equatorial zone, the spread of agricultural populations was converted to a latitudinal axis out of the Borneo-SulawesiMoluccas region, on the one hand westward into western Indonesia, the Malay 
Peninsula, and Madagascar, and on the other hand eastward into Oceania.' The 
presence of an independent focus of early food production in New Guinea complicates 
the Oceanic story, and we return to this later.

First Farmers: The Origins of Agricultural Societies by Peter Bellwood
    
    
    
    
    
  

  

Early Farmers in Mainland Southeast Asia

The mainland of Southeast Asia consists of upland terrain separated by a number 
of very long river valleys, most rising in the eastern fringes of the Himalayas and 
following generally north-south directions (Figure 6.3). These rivers include the 
Irrawaddy, the Salween, the Chao Phraya, the Mekong, and the Red (Hong), and all 
must have served as major conduits of human population movement in the past. 
Thus, it is not surprising that the Neolithic archaeology of this region shows much 
stronger connections with China than it does with India, an axis of relationship to be 
dramatically overturned at about the time of Christ with the spread of the Indic 
cultural influences which came to dominate the Hindu-Buddhist (pre-Islamic) civilizations of Southeast Asia. Prior to 500 BC we see very few connections between India 
and Southeast Asia, except for the presumed spreads westward of Austroasiatic 
(Munda) languages, a topic to which we return in chapter 10.

Unfortunately, the recent rather troubled history of much of Mainland Southeast 
Asia means that we have few data from countries such as Burma, Laos, and Cambodia. 
Matters are improving, but for present purposes we must rely on the richer records 
from Vietnam, Thailand, and Malaysia. In northern Vietnam, the earliest Neolithic is 
a little obscure with respect to origin and economic basis, as it is along the Guangdong 
coast. The oldest pottery in Vietnam is cord-marked, vine- or basket-impressed. 
Because it often occurs in apparent overlap situations with Hoabinhian stone tools in 
caves, there has been a long-standing assumption that indigenous Hoabinhian huntergatherers might have played some role in the beginnings of agriculture in this region. 
This is still not well demonstrated, but there are coastal Neolithic sites such as the 
estuarine shell-midden at Da But and the small open site of Cai Beo which probably 
date to about 4500 Bc, and are thus contemporary with the oldest Guangdong Neolithic 
sites. Da But in particular has oval-sectioned untanged stone adzes that could be 
derived from Hoabinhian / Bacsonian prototypes. Charles Higham (1996a:78) notes 
that these sites have no certain traces of agriculture and may thus have been essentially hunter-gatherer and fishing settlements.

Apart from these early and somewhat puzzling sites, Vietnam became part of a 
widespread Mainland Southeast Asian Neolithic expression between 2500 and 1500 
BC, an expression characterized by a distinctive style of pottery decoration comprising incised zones filled with stamped punctations, often made with a dentate or shelledge tool. Sites of this complex in the Red River Valley are attributed to the Phung 
Nguyen cultural complex and overlap with the development of bronze metallurgy. It 
is in this phase that a number of artifact types with strong southern Chinese parallels make a solid appearance. These include shouldered stone adzes, polished stone projectile points, stone bracelets and penannular earrings, and baked clay spindle whorls. 
More importantly, site sizes during this period became greatly increased, reaching 
3 hectares in the cases of Phung Nguyen and Dong Dau. Many sites of this period 
(including some in southern Vietnam) have good evidence for rice cultivation from 
about 2000 Be onward, an economy which would have flourished on the fertile 
alluvial plains of the Red River (Nguyen 1998). Cattle, buffalo, and pigs might have 
been domesticated during the late Neolithic, but precise data are not available.

Firm data for a spread of rice agriculture by at least 2300 Bc are more clearly 
attested for Thailand (Glover and Higham 1996). As in northern Vietnam, the oldest 
pottery on the Khorat Plateau of northeastern Thailand and in the lower Chao Phraya 
Basin has zoned incision infilled with punctation, together with less flamboyant forms 
of paddle impression, including cord-marking. The former type of decoration is widespread between 2300 and 1500 Bc at sites such as Nong Nor, Khok Phanom Di, Non 
Pa Wai, Tha Kae, and Ban Chiang,' and we will meet it again far to the south in 
Malaysia. The economic record for the Thai Neolithic is especially rich, and most 
sites have evidence for rice cultivation from the beginning, especially in the form of 
husk temper in pottery. Nong Nor in central Thailand has no trace of rice at 2500 BC, 
but nearby and closely related Khok Phanom Di has plentiful evidence from 2000 BC 
onward, even though the excavators regard the rice as imported in the basal layers 
(Higham 2004). In northeastern Thailand, Ban Chiang has rice remains which may 
predate 2000 BC, but in the drier southern part of the Khorat Plateau the first agricultural sites seem to postdate 1500 Be (e.g., Ban Lum Khao in the upper Mun Valley, 
a west-bank tributary of the Mekong). Domestic animals include pig and dog, but 
neither seem to be present (except for wild pig) at Nong Nor. At Khok Phanom Di, 
only the dog is likely to have been domesticated, together possibly with a species of 
jungle fowl. Domesticated cattle (probably of gaur or banteng ancestry) were present 
by at least 1500 BC in northeastern Thailand, at Non Nok Tha, Ban Lum Khao, and 
Ban Chiang. Domesticated water buffalo in Thailand only occur in the Iron Age, 
after 500 BC.

The wide distribution of the distinctive incised and zone-impressed pottery across 
parts of far southern China, northern Vietnam, and Thailand after about 2500 BC 
suggests that this region might express a similar phenomenon to that recognized in 
other regions of agricultural spread, namely an early homogeneity followed by a 
later regionalization of cultural style. Because of gaps in the record it is difficult to be 
certain about this, but this impression has also been remarked upon by Charles 
Higham (1996c). We certainly find a similar situation in the oldest Neolithic in much 
of Island Southeast Asia and the western Pacific, and it also becomes very apparent 
when we examine the oldest Neolithic complexes south of Bangkok, in Peninsular 
Thailand and Malaysia.

The peninsula from southwestern Thailand to Singapore is about 1,600 kilometers 
long and a maximum of about 300 kilometers across. It is entirely tropical, with a 
monsoonal summer wet season in the north, and an equatorial climate with no 
marked dry season in the south. The interior is mountainous, especially in Malaysia, and contains many areas of limestone with caves and rockshelters. The majority of 
archaeological assemblages come from cave locations, a circumstance which doubtless biases the record, but from Hoabinhian into Neolithic times there was certainly 
a very marked shift in cave usage from habitation to burial functions. This may reflect 
the arrival of agriculture, promoting a sedentary lifestyle in villages as opposed to a 
mobile lifestyle using temporary camps in caves.

Peninsular Neolithic pottery has cord-marked decoration, with rare incision or 
red-slipping, often with tripod feet or pedestals. Distinctive vessel tripods with perforations to allow hot air to escape during firing have been found in about twenty sites 
down almost the whole length of the peninsula, from Ban Kao in western Thailand 
to Jenderam Hilir in Selangor (Leong 1991; Bellwood 1993). These represent a very 
consistent tradition of pottery manufacture, although whether exchange or colonization, or both, can explain the widespread homogeneity is not so clear. Stephen Chia 
(1998) has shown that much of the Malaysian Neolithic pottery was locally made, an 
argument which would support a hypothesis of colonization rather than exchange. 
Gua Cha in Kelantan also has fine incised pottery with zoned punctation dating to 
about 1000 Bc, like that discussed above from Vietnam and Thailand (Adi Taha 
1985). Cemeteries of extended burials also contain (as grave goods) stone adzes with 
quadrangular cross-sections, some shouldered or "beaked," stone bark-cloth beaters 
and bracelets, bone harpoons and fishhooks, and shell beads and bracelets. Many of 
these artifacts are closely paralleled in the related site of Khok Phanom Di, and 
especially in the site of Ban Kao, in west-central Thailand, so much so that the term 
"Ban Kao culture" has been used to designate this peninsular complex by the excavator 
of Ban Kao, Per Sorensen (1967).

Sorensen had no doubt after his 1965-66 excavations at Ban Kao that the tripod 
pottery had an origin in "Lungshanoid China," referring at that time to the first 
edition (1963) of K. C. Chang's book on Chinese archaeology. Since that time, no 
archaeology has come to light in support of a direct derivation of the Ban Kao culture 
from a Neolithic assemblage in southern China, but the fact remains that the Mainland Southeast Asian Neolithic as a whole shows very marked signs of an ultimate 
southern Chinese inspiration. Sorensen was clearly on the right track. The Ban Kao 
culture represents a clear movement of Neolithic assemblages down the Malay 
Peninsula at about 2000-1500 BC, although south of Khok Phanom Di there is no 
direct archaeological evidence for rice, so the nature of the driving economy remains 
something of a mystery.

Summarizing the Neolithic record for the Southeast Asian Mainland, we have 
indications of the spread of a well-defined incised and stamped pottery style associated with rice cultivation in far southern China, Vietnam, and Thailand, between 
2500 and 1500 BC. A contemporary but slightly different style of tripod pottery spread 
down the Malay Peninsula after 2000 BC. These spreads appear to have been rapid, 
extensive, and with little sign of continuity from local Hoabinhian forebears. The 
question remains, if there was a movement of farmers out of southern China at this 
time, did it occur down the major rivers, around the Vietnam coastline, or by both 
routes? Only future research is going to answer this question.

We must also note, finally, that some recent palynological and phytolith research 
hints that plant management activities combined with forest clearance might have 
been present well before 2500 BC on the Southeast Asian mainland (Kealhofer 1996; 
Penny 1999). Forest clearance does not, of course, necessarily imply agriculture. But 
the possibility of a Hoabinhian focus on plant management activities long prior to 
the spread of formal field agriculture, probably with a strong tuber and arboricultural 
content, must not be overlooked. This might help to explain some of the mysteries 
of the oldest Neolithic in northern Vietnam referred to above, although we must 
remember, as we will see more clearly in Island Southeast Asia, that it is unreasonable 
to expect all sites with a Neolithic material culture to produce evidence for rice 
agriculture. The absence of rice in some Neolithic sites in Thailand, such as Nong 
Nor and Non Pa Wai, need not mean that the inhabitants were hunter-gatherers of 
Hoabinhian ancestry. Their material culture negates this entirely, and it is more likely 
that the "Neolithic economy" was not monolithic but flexible in differing situations.

First Farmers: The Origins of Agricultural Societies by Peter Bellwood
    
    
    
    
    
  

  

Early Farmers in Taiwan and Island Southeast Asia

We now move southeast to the island chains which festoon the coastline of Southeast Asia. In the Taiwan archaeological record we witness the same phenomenon as 
in the early mainland Neolithic, namely a basal homogeneity followed by increasing 
regionalization. The oldest Neolithic culture in Taiwan, the Dapenkeng,s spread all 
round the coastline of Taiwan after 3500 BC, with a cord-marked and incised pottery 
style so similar everywhere that spread with a new population from Fujian replacing 
or assimilating the earlier Changbinian (a facies of the Hoabinhian) seems assured. 
Close relationships occur with slightly older Fujian pottery assemblages dating to ca. 
4500 BC from sites such as Keqiutou and Fuguodun, the latter on Jinmen (Quemoy) 
Island.'

The Dapenkeng culture is known to have had rice and foxtail millet production, 
pearl shell reaping knives, spindle whorls, and barkcloth beaters, as a result of recent 
excavations in the twin sites of Nanguanli East and West that lie buried under 7 
meters of alluvial plain near Tainan (Tsang Cheng-hwa in press). Rice is also present 
as impressions in sherds in a late Dapenkeng context, ca. 2500 BC, in the site of 
Suogang in the Penghu Islands (Tsang 1992). Furthermore, a pollen diagram from 
Sun-Moon Lake in the mountainous center of Taiwan indicates a marked increase in 
large grass pollen, second growth shrubs, and charcoal particles soon after 3000 BC 
(Tsukada 1967).

Following the period of the Dapenkeng culture there seems to have been internal 
continuity in Taiwan into the succeeding but more varied cultures of the second 
millennium BC. These later cultures include, amongst others, the Yuanshan in the 
Taipei Basin, the Niuchouzi in the southwest, and the Zhangguang and Beinan on 
the southeastern coast. With the passage of time, so the cultural landscape became 
more diversified into regional patterns. Yet, at the same time, there was also continuing contact with the Chinese mainland, as may be seen in pottery and stone tool relationships between Taiwan and contemporary mainland cultures such as the 
Tanshishan of northern Fujian, dating to the third and second millennia BC. Basalt 
from Penghu was also widely used for adze-making in Taiwan from at least 2500 BC 
onward (Rolett et al. 2000).

The main point to emphasize is that the Taiwan prehistoric sequence shows no 
sign of an island-wide replacement of population or cultural tradition following the 
establishment of the Dapenkeng culture at about 3500/3000 BC. There was a relatively continuous history of cultural development into the recent ethnographic past, 
indicating that Austronesian-speaking populations occupied the whole island until 
major Chinese settlement began in the 17th century AD. It was at some point in this 
development, about 2500-2000 Bc according to the archaeological record, after the 
Dapenkeng pottery style had evolved into various regional cord-marked or red-slipped 
expressions, that the first Neolithic farmers moved south into the Philippines and 
eventually Indonesia.

Taiwan does provide one other interesting perspective on early farmers and their 
environmental impact. The Penghu (Pescadores) Archipelago consists of low, sandy, 
and fairly barren islands that lie in the Taiwan Strait, about 50 kilometers from 
Taiwan and 100 kilometers from the Fujian mainland. This is a dry rain-shadow area. 
Today, the Penghu Islands support a small population dependent on fishing and 
peanut cultivation, there being no good rice soils and little surface water. Field surveys 
and excavations here by Tsang Cheng-hwa (1992) uncovered 40 prehistoric sites, all 
of which dated to approximately the third millennium BC, when people grew rice 
(as noted above, rice impressions occur in pottery from the site of Suogang). The 
remaining sites belonged mainly to the period with Chinese trade ceramics during 
and after the Song Dynasty, starting about a millennium ago. The intervening 2,500 
years would appear to be associated with no archaeological record at all.

Can we perhaps see in Penghu the results of an early collapse of an agricultural 
economy under conditions of high population and fairly aggressive rice cropping in a 
fragile environment? Such a collapse would have been localized, since no such gap is 
reported from anywhere on Taiwan itself, a much more fertile island. But, if this 
suggestion is correct there must have been repercussions for increasing agricultural 
investment, as in the Levantine PPNC or the late pueblo cultures of the American 
Southwest. It is impossible to prove that a collapse of this kind led to the movements 
of farming pioneers south into the Philippines, but the time and place are right in a 
general sense.

In the Philippines, northern Borneo, and many regions of eastern Indonesia the 
oldest Neolithic pottery is characterized by simple forms with plain or red-slipped 
surfaces, sometimes with incision or stamped decoration and sometimes with perforated ring feet. This phase has no very clear internal divisions at present and it seems 
to date overall to between 2000 and about 500 BC, when it transforms into a series of 
more elaborately decorated Early Metal Phase ceramics. In the light of recent research 
in the Batanes Islands and the Cagayan Valley of northern Luzon, the origins of this 
red-slipped pottery can be traced to eastern Taiwan assemblages of about 2000 Bc, 
still only hazily reported but presumably the immediate ancestors of the later second millennium Beinan and Zhangguang cultures of the east coast and the Yuanshan of 
northern Taiwan (Figure 7.2). The Fengtian nephrite source in Eastern Taiwan was 
also a source of Neolithic jade (Lien 2002), used not only in Taiwan but also exported 
to the Philippines, where bracelets and earrings of Taiwan jade have been found in 
Neolithic and Early Metal Age sites (dating overall to 1500 BC to early AD) at Anaro 
on Itbayat Island in the Batanes, at Nagsabaran in the Cagayan Valley, and in Uyaw 
Cave on Palawan Island.'

Figure 7.2 Sites (in italics) that have yielded Neolithic red-slipped pottery in Island 
Southeast Asia.

In the Philippines, this type of red-slipped pottery occurs with dentate-stamped 
and incised motifs in the Magapit and Nagsabaran shell midden sites in the lower 
Cagayan Valley of northern Luzon. Dates are from 2000 BC onward at the site of 
Pamittan, and some of the pottery is remarkably similar to contemporary dentatestamped pottery from the Lapita cultural complex in Melanesia and western Polynesia (Figure 7.3). Open sites at Andarayan in the Cagayan Valley and Dimolit in 
northeastern Luzon have yielded rice husks in sherds, dated to about 1600 Bc at 
Andarayan (Snow et al. 1986; Michael Graves pers. comm.). Similar pottery, but 
circle- rather than dentate-stamped, comes from the site of Sunget on Batan Island 
(Batanes), where it dates from about 1200 BC (Bellwood et al. 2003).

Pottery of similar red-slipped type and second millennium Bc date to that from 
Luzon also comes from Bukit Tengkorak in Sabah (Bellwood and Koon 1989), here 
with an agate microblade industry of long drills used for shell-working, and imported 
obsidian carried 3500 kilometers from a source on New Britain in the Bismarck 
Archipelago (Figure 7.1). Bukit Tengkorak has some rather limited evidence for rice 
husks in pottery (Doherty et al. 2000:152), and also large quantities of fishbone and 
fragments of pottery stoves of a type used recently by Bajau "sea nomads" on their 
boats. The implication here is for a maritime economy, mobile, trade focused, with 
only a passing interest in field agriculture. Other assemblages with similar red-slipped 
pottery, but without the agate microblades and New Britain obsidian, and so far also 
without rice, come from northern Sulawesi, the northern Moluccas, and eastern Java 
(Figure 7.2). In the rockshelters of Uattamdi and Leang Tuwo Mane'e such assemblages were probably established by 1300 Bc or before. Here they also occur with 
polished stone adzes, shell beads and bracelets, and bones of pig and dog, none 
present in any older assemblages in this region (Bellwood 1997a).

The implication of all this archaeological material is that a marked cultural break 
with the Preceramic lithic industries of the Indonesian region occurred across a very 
large area, possibly commencing by 2000 BC in the Philippines and appearing close to 
New Guinea, after the loss of rice cultivation, by about 1400 Bc. Some of these 
societies had strong maritime leanings and it was probably from one or more of 
them that the first settlers reached the Mariana Islands in western Micronesia by 1500 
Bc or before, situated across a phenomenal 2000 kilometers of open sea to the east of 
their likely homeland in the Philippines. By 1400 BC, culturally related colonists were 
also moving into Melanesia to spread the Lapita culture over 5500 kilometers eastward from the Admiralty Islands to Samoa. The Lapita movement took only 500 
years or less to reach its limits in the central Pacific, one of the fastest movements of 
a prehistoric colonizing population on record.

Figure 7.3 Dentate-stamped and related pottery from Island Southeast Asia and Lapita 
sites in Melanesia (all apart from a) are red-slipped and have lime or white clay infill in the 
decoration): a) Xiantouling, Guangdong coast, China (pre-3000 Bc?); b) Magapit, Cagayan 
Valley, Luzon (1000 Bc); c) Yuanshan, Taipei, Taiwan (1000 Bc); d) Nagsabaran, Cagayan 
Valley (1500 Bc); e and h) Batungan Cave, Masbate, central Philippines (800 Bc); f) Kamgot, 
Anir Islands, Bismarck Archipelago (Lapita - 1300 Bc); g) Lapita (Site 13), New Caledonia 
(1000 Bc); i and j) Achugao, Saipan, Mariana Islands (1500 Bc); k) Bukit Tengkorak, Sabah, 
1300 Bc.

All of this leads to the fairly astonishing observation that, between 2000 and 800 
Bc, assemblages with related forms of red-slipped and stamped or incised pottery, 
shell artifacts, stone adzes, and keeping of pigs and dogs (neither of these animals 
being native in most of the regions concerned) spread over an area extending almost 
10,000 kilometers from the Philippines through Indonesia to the western islands of 
Polynesia in the central Pacific. The economy driving this expansion was strongly 
maritime in orientation, but these people were also farmers with domesticated 
animals. We have no evidence that any of them grew rice in the islands beyond the 
Philippines and Borneo. It seems that this subtropical cereal faded from the economic 
repertoire as populations moved toward eastern Indonesia. In the western Pacific, 
however, there is good archaeological evidence from Lapita sites for production of a 
range of tubers and fruits, out of a roster of native plants that includes yams, aroids 
(especially taro), coconut, breadfruit, bananas, pandanus (a starchy fruit), canarium nuts, 
and many others, all originally domesticated in the tropical regions from Malaysia 
through to Melanesia (Kirch 1989; Lebot 1998). Neolithic populations either domesticated them, or acquired them from native populations, as they moved southward 
and eastward through the islands.

Meanwhile, it should be noted that the red-slipped pottery horizon does not appear 
in western Indonesia, although the Neolithic archaeological record here is currently 
only poorly understood. Most early pottery assemblages in western Borneo and Java 
tend to have cord-marked or paddle-impressed surface decoration without red slip. In 
Borneo, recent research in Kimanis Cave in East Kalimantan by Karina Arifin (pers. 
comm.) indicates that some sherds of this kind of pottery contain rice impressions. 
Similar rice impressions occur in pottery in the Niah Caves in Sarawak and in the 
cave of Gua Sireh near Kuching, the latter with an actual rice grain embedded in a 
sherd dated to about 2300 Bc by AMS radiocarbon (Ipoi and Bellwood 1991; Bellwood 
et al. 1992; Beavitt et al. 1996; Doherty et al. 2000). My impression from these data, 
still admittedly faint and unconfirmed by any coherent information from Java or 
Sumatra, is that a paddle-impressed style of pottery with widespread evidence of rice 
spread from the Philippines, where similar impressed pottery occurs in Palawan, 
through Borneo and presumably into western Indonesia, after 2500 Bc. This spread 
was apparently independent of that which carried red-slipped pottery and a noncereal economy into the Pacific. Its source remains essentially unknown. However, 
the Malay Peninsula, as noted above, has a Neolithic series of assemblages derived 
from southern Thailand rather than from Indonesia!

Exactly how this Sundaland series of paddle impressed assemblages relates to the 
red-slipped pottery tradition to the east is unknown, but a homeland for both amongst 
populations located in Taiwan and the Philippines at about 2500/2000 BC seems likely. 
We seem to be looking at a geographical and economic bifurcation, the western branch 
emphasizing farming and open field cereal cultivation, the eastern branch trending 
toward a tuber and fruit (arboricultural) focus with a stronger maritime component. 
Pacific peoples such as the Polynesians are clearly very suitable candidates for descent 
from the latter tradition. But, as we will see, there is more to early agriculture in the 
Pacific than simple expansion from Southeast Asia.

First Farmers: The Origins of Agricultural Societies by Peter Bellwood
    
    
    
    
    
  

  

Early farmers in the Pacific

As far as the human settlement of the islands of Remote Oceania is concerned, we 
have essentially three "bouts" of colonizing activity. The first, that described as Lapita 
by archaeologists, led to the settlement of the islands of central and eastern Melanesia, 
plus western Polynesia to as far east as Samoa, by makers of red-slipped and stamped 
pottery (Figure 7.4). This occurred very rapidly between about 1350 and 800 ac. 
Following 800 BC there was an apparent standstill in the central Pacific (Fiji, Tonga, 
Samoa). The so-called "Nuclear" Micronesian islands, excluding the Mariana and Palau 
groups in the west, appear to have been settled about 2,500-2,000 years ago, possibly 
from Melanesia. The final push involved the archipelagos of eastern Polynesia (including New Zealand), settled by aceramic populations between AD 600 and 1250 
(pottery-making was abandoned in western Polynesia soon after 2,000 years ago).

This chronology of colonization with its apparent standstills probably owes little 
in any direct sense to factors of agricultural causation (Bellwood 2001e). The standstills themselves reflect factors of distance, of sea-level fluctuation - many atolls were 
submerged by higher sea levels 3,000 years ago - and of maritime technology. Large 
and efficient canoes were not invented instantly, and sea craft underwent technological 
improvement as the wave of human expansion spread eastward (Anderson 2000). 
The movement also reflected desires to exploit naive bird faunas, as well as social 
factors that encouraged fissioning, and doubtless many other motives, including an 
interest in finding new sources of exotic exchange items. However, agriculture was a 
crucial factor in the overall equation. Without it, the Pacific would never have been 
colonized at all on any long-term basis, at least not the smaller islands in Micronesia 
and Polynesia. Early colonists faced not only sea gaps of increasing width moving 
eastward into the Pacific Ocean, but also islands of decreasing size and diminishing 
native subsistence resources. The latter meant that the agricultural economy as a 
portable subsistence lifeline came into its own, together with an expectable focus on 
marine resources. With the development of substantial ocean-going sea craft, the 
whole Pacific beyond the Solomons was opened for human settlement.'

Thus, we see a vast sweep of agricultural populations moving into new terrain 
from southern China, through Southeast Asia and into the Pacific Islands, over a time 
span of about 5,000 years, commencing at about 3500 ac in Taiwan and culminating 
in the Maori colonization of New Zealand around AD 1250. Within this span of island 
colonization there are some intriguing instances of long-distance exchange, especially 
of lithic raw materials (Figure 7.1), that bring home to us the real extent of voyaging 
ability. Yet, there are two very significant regions that did not form part of this huge 
voyaging network. One was Australia, a continent of consistent and continuing huntergatherer population until European contact. The other was the interior of the massive island of New Guinea, lying just south of the Equator to the east of Indonesia, 
but so very different from the major Indonesian islands in terms of agricultural, 
linguistic, and biological history. New Guinea, and particularly the New Guinea 
Highlands, forms a unique cultural world with a seemingly independent trajectory 
into some form of food production.

First Farmers: The Origins of Agricultural Societies by Peter Bellwood
    
    
    
    
    
  

  

The New Guinea Agricultural Trajectory and its Role in 

Pacific Colonization

Between 1972 and 1977, excavations led by Jack Golson revealed a series of intercutting 
drainage ditches belonging to six separate phases of activity, all dug into a swamp on 
the Kuk tea plantation in the Wahgi Valley, Papua New Guinea Highlands." Radiocarbon dating and a series of dated ash showers established that the sequence might 
have commenced as early as 8000 BC, although the first phase with really substantial 
ditches, up to 3 meters deep and traceable over a length of at least 500 meters, was 
dated at that time to about 5000 sc. The six phases were separated by phases of nonusage of the swamp and succeeded each other through prehistory into recent times, 
the most recent being characterized by a grid of drainage ditches like those used 
ethnographically in the New Guinea Highlands for growing the introduced American 
sweet potato. The assumption made was that the main crops grown at this altitude 
(1,550 meters above sea level) in the early Holocene would have been taro (Colocasia 
esculenta), pandanus, Australimusa bananas (a native New Guinea section of bananas 
with vertical fruit stalks), yams, and sugar cane. Today, yams grow in the highlands 
up to about 1,700-2,000 meters, bananas to about 2,000 meters, and taro to about 
2,700 meters (Bayliss-Smith 1988). Presumably, in the last glacial period, these plants 
would not have grown at all in the broad fertile highland valleys that lie above 1,300 
meters, and would have been restricted to lowland areas and to the steeply sloping 
terrain that surrounds the highlands in most directions. As postglacial temperatures 
rose, people perhaps moved with the rising upper limits for these plants into the 
highlands, then as now a region on the "edge of the range" for agricultural activity 
and thus subject to stress factors that might have stimulated a focus on planting 
rather than simple collecting.

Since the Kuk findings were published there has been considerable discussion as to 
just how "agricultural" were the early Holocene Kuk ditches (Spriggs 1996). Some of 
these questions have now been answered by new research by Tim Denham and his 
colleagues (2003). Through an analysis of pollen, phytoliths, and starch grains from 
the Kuk soil profiles, including the fills of prehistoric ditches, they believe that the 
Kuk landscape was partially cleared for banana cultivation by 4500 BC, and that 
some of the bananas at this time were being deliberately grown in mounds close 
to the edge of the swamp. Slightly uncertain evidence for shifting cultivation extends 
back as far as 8000 BC, but this team dates the first drainage ditch networks to only 
2000 BC, younger than the original date favored by Golson. Starch grains indicate 
cultivation of taro, and phytoliths indicate cultivation of bananas of the Eumusa 
section to which most modern commercial bananas belong, rather than bananas of 
the previously suspected but less significant Australimusa section. If this research is 
upheld, it will make an important case for origin of many cultivated bananas and 
some taros in New Guinea, rather than in the islands of Southeast Asia, thus marking 
an important contribution of Papuan horticulture to Austronesian crop rosters as 
Austronesian settlers moved into the Melanesian region from Indonesia about 
1400 BC.

This research reinforces very strongly the idea that some form of gardening 
economy with planting of tubers and fruit-bearing small trees, utilizing fertile swamp 
soils wherever they were available, was present in the New Guinea Highlands in the 
early Holocene. This qualifies to be considered as true and primary agriculture, albeit 
not a highly expansive system in the absence of cereals and domesticated animals. 
No evidence is available to indicate that tropical regions further west in Indonesia 
witnessed such developments prior to the arrival of Austronesian farmers, so perhaps 
we can ask why agriculture developed specifically in the New Guinea Highlands, and 
what were its repercussions in terms of population growth and dispersal.

Firstly, New Guinea is unique in having a continuous highland spine almost 
2,000 kilometers long, as opposed to the smaller discontinuous areas of highland 
characteristic of other large tropical islands such as Borneo and Java. The New Guinea 
highlands, with their large valleys and dense populations, lie mostly between 1,300 
and 2,300 meters above sea level (ground frosts start at 2,600 meters). They thus 
form a large island of non-tropical climate, at least in terms of temperature, within 
the vast terrain of equatorial lowland which extends right through Island Southeast 
Asia and into the western Pacific. Such a special kind of region might, perhaps, be 
expected to have had a special kind of prehistory.

Secondly, by 8500 BC the New Guinea Highland late glacial climate had ameliorated 
to present conditions and the tree-line had risen almost 2,000 meters in a remarkably 
short period, perhaps only one millennium, to reach its present altitude at ca. 4,000 
meters above sea level (Swadling and Hope 1992; Haberle et al. 1991). A warm 
climatic situation with a relatively non-seasonal rainfall distribution pattern was thus 
established, suitable for the development of traditional New Guinea agricultural 
systems focused on tubers and tree products.

Thirdly, technology seems to have changed very little before, during, or after the 
advent of agriculture in New Guinea. We see no rapid spreads of new art styles, 
pottery (never manufactured in the main highlands), or new forms of flaked lithics. 
Neither are there any recognizable harvesting tools in the oldest agricultural contexts. Except for the appearance of ground stone axes at an uncertain date in the 
early Holocene, the archaeological face of early agriculture shows no real change at 
all from the hunter-gatherer background assemblages of the Late Pleistocene. This 
suggests a fundamental continuity of cultural tradition across the transition, even 
though the tempo of technological change seems to have been much less marked 
than in regions such as Southwest Asia, China, or Mesoamerica.

Could New Guinea agriculture have developed first in the lowlands and then 
spread into the highlands? I rather doubt it, as does Paul Gorecki (1986). The altitudinal 
locations of early sites in New Guinea have been plotted by Simon Haberle (1994), 
and a virtual absence of sites of all periods between 500 and 1,300 meters above sea 
level is very apparent. Coastal sites are also few, and show no signs of early agriculture. Finds of plant remains dated to ca. 4000 ac at Dongan in the lowland Sepik 
basin (candlenut, canarium, coconut, pandanus, possibly sago) are of great interest 
here, but all could have been exploited from self-propagated rather than planted trees 
(Swadling et al. 1991). In the New Guinea lowlands there is no hard evidence for actual plant cultivation, as opposed to possible management, prior to the arrival of 
Austronesian-speaking populations within the past 3,000 years. The highlands also 
fit best with the "edge-of-the-range" theory for agricultural origins, as it has been 
applied to Southwest Asia and China (Bellwood 1996b).

Given the rather special environment of the New Guinea Highlands within the 
Southeast Asian context, it may be suggested that any early Holocene stress factor, 
such as a long episode of locally unprecedented drought (Brookfield 1989), would 
have encouraged a switch to swamp-edge planting of wild tubers and fruits at key 
altitudes in favorable locations. The unstable climatic conditions at the end of the last 
glaciation could thus have led to fluctuations in food supplies, and in the case of Kuk 
Swamp the transition to agriculture occurred within the zone where many cultivated 
plants, such as taro, banana, and sugar cane, were approaching the altitudinal limits 
of their growth ranges. Once swamp-edge planting commenced, probably in combination with some degree of swiddening on adjacent terrain (Bayliss-Smith 1988; 
Denham et al. 2003), it is not hard to visualize communities being propelled toward 
increasing investment in new forms of production, such as the grassland tillage 
and tree-fallowing described for the later phases at Kuk by Jack Golson and Don 
Gardner (1990).

As for agricultural dispersal, it can only be stated that New Guinea does not show 
the expansive trends so typical of other regions such as the Middle East, Mesoamerica, 
and China. The archaeological and linguistic records do not indicate any major colonizations from the highlands out into the islands of Melanesia, and the total absence 
of any agricultural spread into Australia is very striking, despite the fact that it was 
probably still joined to New Guinea by dry land when the agricultural developments 
began. Although the Oceanic peoples living beyond New Guinea grew similar crops 
to the gardeners of the New Guinea Highlands, and might even have acquired some 
crop varieties from New Guinea sources, the terms they used for them were derived 
from Austronesian sources in the Philippines and Indonesia rather than from Papuan 
sources in New Guinea. Perhaps this non-expansive situation reflects in part the 
isolation of the highlands by inhospitable terrain, and the scourge of malaria afflicting 
any situations of increasing population density in the surrounding lowlands. However, an eventual spread of farmers from the highlands into the lowlands of New 
Guinea itself is attested quite well by the linguistic record, to which we return later.

The evidence to hand suggests that the New Guinea transition into some form of 
food production was perhaps as old a transition as anywhere else in the world, and it 
was clearly pristine. It might also have had similar causes, if we can take seriously the 
many current claims for risk management as a major factor in the beginnings of 
agriculture. From the viewpoint of overall productivity, in its early days the New 
Guinea agricultural scene was without any domestic animals, until the pig was introduced from Indonesia after 1000 BC, with dog and chicken perhaps later. The fact 
remains, however, that even without any major expansion of New Guinea agriculturalists and their languages into regions further away than Timor, Halmahera, and the 
Solomon Islands, their biological impact on the phenotype of the western Pacific has 
been immense. Although the languages and agricultural systems of the Austronesian speaking populations of Island Southeast Asia and the Pacific islands for the most 
part reveal undoubted Southeast Asian, even southern Chinese origins, the same is 
not true of biological genotypes, at least not in those islands which stretch from New 
Guinea to Fiji. New Guinea has been a powerhouse in the prehistory of the western 
Pacific, a circumstance underlined by the fact that its present populations, at least in 
the Highlands, are with little doubt the direct descendants of populations living on 
the island during the late Pleistocene. New Guinea, unlike its neighbors, was never 
seriously colonized by incoming agriculturalists. Neither, of course, was Australia, but 
that seems to reflect isolation and environmental factors rather than any New Guinealike ability to provide the wherewithal for an independent origin of agriculture.
