Chapter 11 - Genetics, Skeletal Anthropology, and the People Factor
===================================================================

First Farmers: The Origins of Agricultural Societies by Peter Bellwood
    
    
    
    
    
  

  

Chapter 11

Genetics, Skeletal Anthropology, 

and the People Factor

Critics of the early farming dispersal hypothesis usually raise the crunch-time question: 
never mind the languages and archaeology, what about the people? Did languages 
and farming lifestyles spread through unmoving populations of hunter-gatherers simply by cultural diffusion (i.e., adoption, borrowing, acculturation), or did they spread 
because of the demographic expansion (via demic diffusion) of populations whose 
ancestors already possessed the relevant languages and farming lifestyles? For some 
regions of the world, biological data are too few to inform usefully and directly on 
such questions. For other regions, such as western Eurasia and Southeast Asia/ Oceania, 
the debates are quite heated and schools of opinion can be discerned emerging from 
the steam. This is because both kinds of movement are, of course, logically possible, 
and can be eloquently argued for, even though the biological data do not clinch the 
matter with the finality that some protagonists might hope for.

The phenomenon of actual population spread is referred to in this chapter as 
demic diffusion, following the terminology used in their classic study of Neolithic 
Europe by archaeologist Albert Ammerman and geneticist Luca Cavalli-Sforza (1984:6). 
Demic diffusion in prehistoric contexts would have occurred, at least in optimal 
continental circumstances, via a wave of advance, in which continuous demographic 
growth in non-circumscribed frontier situations would have prompted a population 
boundary to expand outward by gradual or saltational means. The inward (or backward) direction would have been demographically "full," settled by populations that 
had reached optimal size after the wave of advance had moved on beyond them. 
Ammerman and Cavalli-Sforza calculated, using archaeological C14 dates, that a 
Neolithic wave of advance spread from southeast to northwest through Mesolithic 
Europe at an average rate of around 1 kilometer per year (see also Fort and Mendez 
1999; and Fort 2003 for comparable calculations for the Pacific). They noted also that 
actual rates of spread on the ground would have varied greatly because of environmental barriers and differing carrying capacities.

Ammerman and Cavalli-Sforza most emphatically did not suggest that the Neolithic 
farmers simply drove all the Mesolithic foragers in Europe into extinction - critics of 
the wave of advance model sometimes jump unfairly to this conclusion without 
good reason. Instead, they advocated continuing genetic admixture between the two 
groups as the wave of advance progressed (1984:128-130), such that the ultimate 
cultural and linguistic descendants of a "Middle Eastern" population commencing 
with 100 percent "farmer" genes, upon reaching the Atlantic limits, could have found 
themselves (had they noticed!) with almost 100 percent "native forager" genes, at 
least in theory (Krantz 1988:93; Cavalli-Sforza 2003). Such a process would have 
established what geneticists term a demic cline - a geographical gradient away from 
an origin in the occurrence of one or more genes. The essence here is a continuous 
watering-down of an expanding genetic configuration, away from its original state, 
by inexorable local input from an ever-unfolding native genetic landscape (Renfrew 
2001c, 2003). It need hardly be stressed that Neolithic farmers could not have spread 
in the way 19th-century European colonists migrated to North America and Australasia, with constant back-up from source in the form of flotillas of ships carrying 
thousands of people. Neolithic expansion was more of an insistent creep, with occasional jumps, than a sudden and overwhelming sonic boom.

We return to genes and clines later, first making the point that this is not a chapter 
on the technicalities of population genetics, biochemistry, and mathematical computation. Interest here is in the historical observations that paleoanthropologists 
and geneticists can make about ancient human populations, rather than in the analyses and computations of the genetic data themselves. Archaeologists in search of 
population history should at least attempt to understand the historical reasoning 
processes of linguists and biologists, just as reverse accommodations should also 
take place.

First Farmers: The Origins of Agricultural Societies by Peter Bellwood
    
    
    
    
    
  

  

Are There Correlations between Human Biology and 

Language Families?

In 1774, on Cook's Second Voyage to discover the Great Southern Continent, Johann 
Reinhold Forster mused "What occasions the inhabitants of O-Taheitee to be so 
much distinguished from the Mallicolese?" (Thomas et al. 1996:175). He had noted 
that the Tahitians of Polynesia and the Malekulans of Vanuatu (Melanesia) spoke 
languages (now known as Austronesian) with many words in common, yet the people 
were so different in physical appearance. Austronesians are physically very varied, 
just as are speakers of Afroasiatic (e.g., Arabs and Ethiopians), Indo-European (e.g., 
Bengalis and Norwegians), and Altaic languages (e.g., Turks and Mongolians), to 
name just a few of the more obvious cases. The speakers within these language 
families seem unlikely to have descended entirely from single founder biological 
populations in the few millennia since the linguistic dispersals occurred, at least not 
in terms of our current understanding of rates of biological change in humans. But 
do these patterns reflect language movements through unmoving but already highly differentiated populations, or do they reflect population movements leading to a 
kaleidoscope of admixture between incoming and indigenous groups?

We might begin by asking if there are any demonstrable geographical correlations 
today between patterns of linguistic and biological variation on a worldwide canvas. 
If there are, then it stands to reason that such correlations could result from past 
episodes of demic diffusion, when population expansions occurred that carried 
both genes and languages. In 1988 and 1994, Luca Cavalli-Sforza and his colleagues 
addressed this question from a worldwide perspective, utilizing genetic distance analyses of 42 modern populations in terms of their frequencies of 120 different classical 
genetic markers. They claimed that the resulting genetic tree of populations resembled closely a tree of populations classified by language family membership, a claim 
recently restated (with qualifications) by Daniel Nettle and Louise Harriss (2003), 
using the same gene frequency data. Basically, genetic distances and languages correlate quite closely in Europe, East and Central Asia, but rather less well in West 
Africa, Southwest and Southeast Asia. Nettle and Harriss rightly point out that strong 
cases of correlation could result from situations of past demic diffusion, whereas 
weaker situations allow for more population mixing. Furthermore, by controlling for 
the influence of purely geographical factors in their analysis, they are able to refute 
the complaint that such correlations simply reflect geographical proximity, rather 
than factors of correlated genetic and linguistic origin.'

First Farmers: The Origins of Agricultural Societies by Peter Bellwood
    
    
    
    
    
  

  

Do genes record history?

Luca Cavalli-Sforza has asked, "can the history of humankind be reconstructed on 
the basis of today's genetic situation?" (Cavalli-Sforza and Cavalli-Sforza 1995:106). 
Well might we ask, given that identification of ancient DNA from bone is a technique still in its infancy, having so far yielded few data significant for the questions 
addressed in this book (Paabo 1999). The question of whether genetic data drawn 
from the blood, hair, or saliva of modem sample populations can be used as direct 
witnesses for the histories of whole populations who lived many millennia ago is a 
very fundamental one. A mind-modeling of what might have happened in a Neolithic 
situation involving population growth will quickly show why.

If we begin with a Neolithic source population, dependent upon farming and with 
a healthy rate of demographic growth, then during every generation a few members 
of the group will wish to seek new land, with their families, sometimes close to the 
source region, sometimes further afield, depending on the varied realities of geography and environment, social competition, and desire for founder status. If allowed, as 
for instance in situations where early farmers were surrounded by hunter-gatherers 
rather than other equally territorial farmers, the wave of advance will spread out 
gradually, yet continually, in theory involving interbreeding with surrounding huntergatherer populations, perhaps mainly via forager female/farmer male parenthood 
if the ethnographic record is any guide. There will be a continuous watering-down 
of the original farmer genetic profile as the frontier spreads away from the source 
region.

But now impose upon the foundation genetic edifice that has resulted from such a 
farming dispersal several subsequent millennia of continuing mutation, natural selection, and genetic drift. Impose also cultural and natural events such as invasions, 
massacres, epidemics, and natural disasters, and we might wonder how the source 
genetic configuration could ever possibly survive at all to be still traceable into the 
present. That such tracing can occur at all is quite remarkable, and in part due to 
the careful attention paid by geneticists to both the clinal geography of multiple 
genetic markers studied in combination (e.g., Ammerman and Cavalli-Sforza 1984), 
and to the phylogenetic analysis of non-recombining mitochondria) DNA and Ychromosome lineages as they spread through space and mutate through time.'

Currently, geneticists engage in considerable debate about the historical significances 
of their data, especially of the trans-continental clines that are often visible in both 
the nuclear and non-recombining genetic systems. To understand the genesis of 
these clines, it is necessary also to be aware of the roles of natural selection (especially through climate and disease), and the factors of chance in reproductive strategies that can have a major effect on the survival of lineages.

For instance, Ronan Loftus and Patrick Cunningham (2000) note, actually in this 
instance discussing the mtDNA of African cattle:

in a population where females leave on average one surviving daughter per generation, 
any single mother has only a two percent chance of contributing her mtDNA to a 
population one hundred generations later.

Thus, some of the mitochondrial lineages that characterized a population at source 
can disappear through genetic drift as the generations pass by, ultimately to be replaced 
by other lineages that have either mutated or have become incorporated through 
intermarriage. Such lineages need have no bearing on the ultimate origin of the core 
population. These stochastic processes will be enhanced in small populations that 
tend to undergo periodic isolation, as for instance in small islands or rugged terrain.

In fact, mtDNA lineage distributions and mutation ages have to be handled with 
extreme care when the history of a whole human population is at stake, rather than 
just that of the lineage itself. Molecular clock forms of dating, whereby mtDNA and 
Y-chromosome lineages are given mutation ages according to assumed rates of 
nucleotide sequence mutation through time, can be particularly contentious. This 
issue is far too complex for further discussion here, but many geneticists have misgivings about the accuracy of such dating methods (e.g., Bradley and Loftus 2000:248; 
Cavalli-Sforza 2003:85). Perhaps it is not surprising that Erika Hagelberg (2000:5-6) 
has recently stated that genetic data "cannot provide clear-cut evidence of historical 
events ... We cannot simply look at DNA of so-called native peoples and expect to 
reconstruct the past."

Nevertheless, geneticists are currently making many grand claims for the histories 
of populations, including those populations attached to language families, so we turn 
now to relevant early farming situations where genetic or skeletal data can reflect 
usefully upon issues of demic versus cultural diffusion. The focus is quite heavily on Neolithic Europe and Austronesia, because of the high intensities of debate and 
publication in these regions.

First Farmers: The Origins of Agricultural Societies by Peter Bellwood
    
    
    
    
    
  

  

Southwest Asia and Europe

This is the classic area for debate over cultural versus demic diffusion models for the 
spread of farming. The original demic diffusion model of Ammerman and CavalliSforza required active population growth along an expanding frontier, moving across 
Europe from southeast to northwest at an average rate of one kilometer per annum 
and incorporating indigenous hunter-gatherer populations along the way. Principal 
components analysis of the genetic data suggested that this particular movement, the 
major one of three identified in the data, accounted for about 30 percent of the 
genetic variation in modern European populations (Figure 11.1 upper left).

This model has spawned enormous debate over the past 20 years, most fairly 
inconclusive until the eruption of mtDNA analysis during the mid-1990s. Alan Fix 
(1999) has recently suggested that the major southeast-to-northwest dine identified 
by Cavalli-Sforza and his colleagues, especially in terms of HLA genes, could reflect 
the effects of selection caused by the farming economy itself, for instance through 
the associated spread of diseases originating from domesticated animals (zoonotic 
diseases), or the spread of malaria amongst relatively large and densely settled Neolithic 
populations, even in temperate latitudes. He does not rule out demic diffusion as a 
significant process in the genetic foundations of Neolithic Europe, but feels instead 
that genetic data cannot really illuminate its significance. Cavalli-Sforza himself, supported strongly by Italian geneticist Guido Barbujani and other colleagues, feels conversely that the observed cline is so complex that it must result to a degree from 
population movement rather than natural selection alone (Cavalli-Sforza and CavalliSforza 1995:149; Barbujani et al. 1998). Other critics, however, point out that the 
cline is not in itself dateable to any particular period in time, and could just as well be 
Paleolithic as Neolithic in origin.

The debate has become more lively in recent years with the increasing emphasis 
on the analysis of haploid markers in mitochondrial DNA and on the Y-chromosome. 
Interpretations of the data have become complex and varied in the extreme, but two 
schools of historical interpretation appear to be consolidating. One, basing its historical 
reconstructions on the phylogenetic analysis of mtDNA and Y-chromosome lineages, 
regards most modem Europeans as having essentially local Paleolithic ancestries, 
with input of Southwest Asian genes during the Neolithic accounting for very little of 
the modern patterning. This school favors cultural rather than demic diffusion, and its 
views have most recently been summarized by Martin Richards (2003). The strongest 
opposed viewpoint favoring demic diffusion derives from modeling the consequences 
of admixture between postulated Paleolithic European and Neolithic Southwest Asian 
gene pools, using both the non-recombining systems as well as nuclear DNA.

In order to put this debate into perspective I will review some of the most significant recent opinions in chronological order, subsequent to the classic 1984 study by Ammerman and Cavalli-Sforza. In 1991, a genetic distance analysis of 26 polymorphic 
genetic systems by Sokal, Oden, and Wilson resulted in the statement: "We conclude 
that the spread of agriculture through Europe was not simply a case of cultural 
diffusion, but involved significant differential reproduction of the new farmers whose 
origins can be traced to the Near East." Full support was given to theories of linked 
Neolithic and Indo-European spreads across Europe, and allowance was made for 
"diffusive gene flow between the neolithic farmers and mesolithic groups."

Figure 11.1 Upper left: The clinal distribution of markers in 91 nuclear genetic systems 
from southwest to northwest across Europe, identified by principal components analysis. 
This is the first principal component within the data and it accounts for about 30% of the 
total variation. After Cavalli-Sforza and Minch 1997. Upper right: A plot of the most 
probable Neolithic contribution to the modern Y chromosome genotype, as assessed by 
Chihki et al. 2002 for European genetic samples against their geographic distance from the 
Levant. After Bentley et al. 2003. Lower: A model for Mesolithic-Neolithic genetic 
admixture in Europe based on demographic assumptions and the archaeological record. 
After Lahr et al. 2000.

Although Sokal and his team qualified their conclusions in the following year 
(Sokal et al. 1992), the demic diffusion model for Neolithic and Indo-European spread 
was soon given further support from a spatial autocorrelation analysis of genetic and 
linguistic similarities among Eurasian populations by Guido Barbujani and colleagues 
(1994). Alberto Piazza and colleagues (1995) then used synthetic genetic maps to 
claim, in agreement with Luca Cavalli-Sforza, that a Neolithic spread through Europe 
from Southwest Asia accounted for 26 percent of modern genetic variation.

In 1995, Sokal teamed up with Barbujani to return to the issue of demic diffusion, 
concluding from a computer simulation of five models of microevolution in European populations that: "The genetic structure of current populations speaking IndoEuropean languages seems therefore to largely reflect a Neolithic expansion ... 
Allele-frequency gradients among Indo-European speakers may be due either to 
incomplete admixture between dispersing farmers, who presumably spoke IndoEuropean, and pre-existing hunters and gatherers (as in the traditional demic diffusion 
hypothesis), or to founder effects during the farmers' dispersal" (Barbujani et al. 
1995:109). The demic diffusion model was becoming well established.

Indeed, by 1996, an unbiased observer might have drawn the conclusion that 
demic diffusion had won the day, at least for Neolithic Europe. However, the 
cultural diffusion school was clearly not going to give in quietly. Martin Richards 
and colleagues, basing their views on molecular clock calculations and patterns of 
internal phylogenetic diversity in mtDNA lineages, concluded that "the major extant 
[mtDNA] lineages throughout Europe predate the Neolithic expansion and ... the 
spread of agriculture was a substantially indigenous development accompanied by 
only a relatively minor component of contemporary Middle Eastern agriculturalists" 
(Richards et al. 1996:185).

Debate naturally ensued over this paper, and battle lines started to emerge (CavalliSforza and Minch 1997: Richards et al. 1997; Barbujani et al. 1998). The Richards 
team restated the value of a phylogeographic approach focused on molecular ages 
for MtDNA lineages, whereas the Barbujani team countered (1998:489): "We do not 
think that the age of a group of [mtDNA] haplotypes can be mechanically equated to 
the age of the population from which they came, especially if these haplotypes are 
also found elsewhere ... inferences from population history must be based on measures of genetic diversity between populations, not between molecules."

In 1998, Antonio Torroni and colleagues entered the debate on the side of the 
cultural diffusionists, by suggesting that most European mtDNA lineages spread with 
ancestral populations emerging from late glacial refugia, particularly from Iberia. 
They claimed also that Southwest Asian mtDNA haplogroup H accounted for between 40 and 60 percent of mtDNA lineages in western Europe, but removed this from 
Neolithic consideration by giving it an age of more than 25,000 years.

Cultural (non-demic) diffusion received another boost when Bryan Sykes (1999a) 
restated that the Southwest Asian contribution to the European mtDNA pool was 
only between 20 and 30 percent, and further claimed that 70 percent of the European 
mtDNA gene pool originated in the post-glacial re-peopling of Europe, between 
11,000 and 14,000 years ago. Martin Richards and colleagues (2000) then restated 
the case for a Paleolithic inheritance using what they termed "founder analysis," 
reemphasizing that most European mtDNA lineages expanded after the last glaciation and that under 25 percent of the modem mtDNA pool in Europe was brought in 
during the Neolithic. However, they remained open to debate on these issues, concurring that: "it is important to bear in mind that these values indicate the likely 
contribution of each prehistoric expansion to the composition of the present-day 
mtDNA pool. Extrapolating from this information to details of the demography at 
the time of the migration, although of course highly desirable for the reconstruction of 
archaeological processes, is unlikely to be straightforward" (Richards et al. 2000:1272).

In 2000, Ornella Semino and colleagues brought Y-chromosome data into the fray, 
suggesting that about 78 percent of European Y-chromosome variation related to 
Paleolithic expansions from glacial refugia in Iberia and Ukraine. They attributed 
about 22 percent of the modem variation to four haplotypes that spread during the 
Neolithic from the Levant, thus supporting the claims by Richards and Sykes for only 
a low Neolithic contribution based on mtDNA.

Between 1996 and 2000, therefore, cultural diffusion was making a strong comeback, even though the percentages actually offered by each school for the Neolithic 
contribution to the overall European gene pool overlapped considerably, generally 
between 20 and 30 percent. However, the demic diffusion school was not slow to 
reply. Lounes Chikhi and colleagues (1998a, 1998b) identified a cline across Europe in 
molecular DNA markers that paralleled closely the original cline in classical protein 
markers proposed by Cavalli-Sforza and Piazza. Their own molecular clock calculations placed the population expansion that led to this cline squarely in the Neolithic, 
and they argued for younger dates for the so-called Paleolithic mtDNA lineages.

Zoe Rosser and colleagues (2000) then indicated clines in two Y-chromosome 
haplogroups that today account for 45 percent of European variation. These clines 
were stated, slightly cautiously since they are also strongly influenced by geography, 
to be good evidence for significant demic diffusion of Neolithic farmers from Southwest Asia. The authors suggested that much of the genetic patterning in Europe may 
have developed with the spread of Indo-European languages (see also Simoni et al. 
2000).

By 2001, Y-chromosome data were sufficiently detailed for Peter Underhill and 
colleagues (2001a; Underhill 2003) to summarize worldwide patterns, showing that 
European and west/central Asian populations are closely related in terms of Y haplogroups, particularly when compared to sub-Saharan African and East Asian populations. 
Two of the Y haplogroups concerned, III and part of VI, could have spread into 
Europe by Neolithic expansion, and it was acknowledged that the Y-chromosome data support the model of demic diffusion with population admixture, from southeast to northwest across Neolithic Europe.

In 2002, Lounes Chikhi and colleagues analyzed 22 binary markers on the Ychromosome in order to model situations of admixture, followed by genetic drift, 
between two "ideal" populations, one using modern Near Eastern samples to represent a "Neolithic" mode, the other using Basque and Sardinian samples to represent 
a "Paleolithic" mode. An essential assumption here is that the real genetic patterning 
present in the Near East and western Europe 10,000 years ago is unknowable, so only 
a modeling process of this type will lead to realistic conclusions. The authors concluded that the Neolithic contribution to modern European Y-chromosomes must 
have been about 50 percent on average, far higher than either the original estimate 
by Cavalli-Sforza or that from the mtDNA phylogeographic approach of Martin 
Richards (both under 30 percent). There is geographical variation, however, with a 
Near Eastern component of 85-100 percent in southeastern Europe, but only 15-30 
percent in France (Figure 11.1 upper right).

By 2002, the supporters of both cultural and demic diffusion had fired many salvos, 
and the debate is far from over. In 2003, as I finalize this chapter, a compilation of 
genetics papers on Europe has just been published by the McDonald Institute, as part 
of a worldwide review of the farming/ language dispersal hypothesis (Bellwood and 
Renfrew 2003). Guido Barbujani and Isabelle Dupanloup, together with Luca CavalliSforza, and Lounes Chikhi, restate the case for significant demic diffusion of a Southwest Asian Neolithic population into Europe. Barbujani and Dupanloup note how 
the results of admixture between farmers and foragers will vary in terms of just when 
in the historical sequence the interbreeding became significant; in other words, foragers would have had far greater genetic impact if they interbred early on with small 
groups of expanding farmers, much greater than if they went into an early isolationist mode and only emerged much later on to face a farmer population increased by 
several generations of rapid internal population growth. They conclude "At present, 
we think there are good reasons to take sides with the earlier (Ammerman and 
Cavalli-Sforza 1984) rather than with the later (Semino et al. 2000) studies by Cavalli- 
Sforza's group, and to maintain that a large fraction of the European gene pool is 
derived from the genes of ancestors who did not live in Europe, but in the Levant, 
until the Neolithic" (Barbujani and Dupanloup 2003:430).

From the cultural diffusion perspective, Martin Richards and colleagues in the 
same volume restate the case for only a low proportion of Near Eastern genes across 
Europe, in fact only about 20 percent, but they also suggest that when the small 
numbers of Near Eastern farmers did move, they moved far and rapidly. They 
(2003:464) conclude that "Farming dispersal models may yet have a role to play in 
explaining language expansions. But grand syntheses based on demic diffusion and 
the wave of advance, in which farming, languages and genes all expand together, 
should become a thing of the past." I could not agree more, and sense from this 
statement a desire for a middle ground.

The middle ground will perhaps be found after more careful consideration of 
the obvious fact that Europe cannot be considered a single "place" for purposes of Mesolithic to Neolithic transition models. Whatever overall percentage of genes the 
Neolithic farmers brought into Europe, the actual results of farmer-forager interbreeding must have varied across the continent, with the Southwest Asian component 
necessarily being largest in the south and east, and smallest in the west and north. 
This has come more into focus with a paper by Roy King and Peter Underhill (2002), 
in which it is claimed that there are very significant correlations between the distributions of painted pottery and anthropomorphic figurines in Neolithic archaeological 
contexts in the Levant, Anatolia, and southeastern Europe, and the distribution of a 
particular Y-chromosome haplogroup termed Eu9. This correlation supports a hypothesis of demic diffusion, at least of males, out of Southwest Asia to as far west as 
southern France. In addition, analysis of ancient bone from LBK contexts in France 
and Germany has indicated the presence of mtDNA lineages of Southwest Asian 
origin - direct evidence for the movement of at least some females during the Neolithic 
(Jones 2001:161).

As in the earlier Archaeogenetics volume produced by the McDonald Institute 
(Renfrew and Boyle 2000), the debate over demic vs. cultural diffusion for Neolithic 
Europe still remains very lively. The dust has not settled yet and there is no obvious 
neat and tidy genetic reconstruction for the whole of Europe that can be presented in 
a nutshell. This being the case, can we extract any useful data, independently of the 
genetics, from the results of skeletal analysis and observations of visible biological 
characters?

The most obvious example of the latter is the cline in hair and eye pigmentation 
that runs from relatively dark in the Levant and along the Mediterranean, to light 
(fair hair, blue eyes) around the North and Baltic Seas and in Scandinavia (Sidrys 
1996). At first sight, this could indicate a relative isolation of northern Europeans 
from any Levantine or Mediterranean influence, but the situation is not really so 
simple. Natural selection for pale pigmentation via Vitamin D synthesis over a period 
of 6,000 years, in cold climate circumstances where humans covered themselves with 
clothing, together with assortative mating, could in theory also have produced the 
observed cline.

Paleodemographic data also have a contribution to make. An age-at-death analysis 
of skeletons in European Neolithic cemeteries has recently allowed Jean-Pierre 
Bocquet-Appel (2002) to suggest a rapid increase in birth rate immediately following 
the adoption or spread of agriculture in Europe, followed much later by a rising 
mortality rate. The earliest farmers were clearly fertile, and Bocquet-Appel draws the 
conclusion: "With the data currently available, this [pan-European Mesolithic to 
Neolithic] transition is characterized by a clear rupture with the previous stationary 
regime of foragers over a period of some 500 years." However, farmer fecundity 
need not automatically mean demic diffusion of pre-existing farmers, since foragers 
can also adopt farming and lessen their birth intervals. Bocquet-Appel's results only 
underpin the reality of rapid early farmer demographic growth.

Another source of skeletal data involves metric and morphological analysis of 
crania from ancient cemeteries and other archaeological contexts in order to determine 
population affinities. Slovimil Vencl (1986) analyzed skeletal evidence from central Europe to suggest a tenfold increase in population numbers from the Mesolithic into 
the Neolithic, and a complete population replacement across the transition, with 
hunter-gatherers holding out only in areas sub-optimal for farming. A more recent 
multivariate analysis of cranial data from Turkey and the Levant, plus southeastern 
and Mediterranean Europe, suggests three conclusions (Pinhasi and Pluciennik in press):

1. PPNB populations in the Levant and Anatolia were very varied.

2. Southeastern European Neolithic peoples were probably drawn from a central 
Anatolian Neolithic population represented by the burials from catalhoytik.

3. Mediterranean populations originated from a greater degree of MesolithicNeolithic admixture than those in southeastern Europe.

As the authors point out, these conclusions are more precise geographically than 
those drawn from genetic analyses, the latter being "of insufficient resolution for 
regional assessment." Their conclusions are rather similar to those drawn by Marta 
Lahr and colleagues (2000), based on demographic modeling and the archaeological 
record. These are shown in Figure 11.1 (lower), and indicate something a little similar 
to the first principal component of Cavalli-Sforza, in that there is an obvious cline 
from Anatolia, through Greece and the Balkans, into central and then Mediterranean 
and western Europe. A recent strontium isotope analysis of female skeletons from 
LBK contexts in the Rhineland perhaps tells us how such a cline might have originated, in this case via the in-marrying or capture of non-local (Mesolithic?) females 
who grew up in, and thus acquired chemical signatures in their bones from, upland 
areas away from the riverine landscape favored for LBK farming (Bentley et al. 2003).

I have deliberately gone into the European situation in depth because of the vast 
quantity of data available for that region. Clearly, and despite obvious disagreements, 
the indications point consistently to a "common sense" scenario that requires a 
Neolithic population to spread in from the southeast and to gradually "disappear" in 
a genetic sense as the wave of advance spread toward the northwest. The disagreements relate to the strength of this wave of advance, not to its very existence. The 
perspective I am offering in this book leads me to believe, with geneticists such as 
Lounes Chikhi and Guido Barbujani, that the strength of this advance was considerable, and that Mesolithic populations, while contributing genes in a markedly clinal 
fashion, did not contribute very much to the resulting patterns of archaeology and 
language in Europe, except in situations where they survived temporarily in relative 
isolation. For other regions of the world we do not have anywhere near such a 
density of data, but we also have interesting debates.

First Farmers: The Origins of Agricultural Societies by Peter Bellwood
    
    
    
    
    
  

  

South Asia

The debate for this region is really only just starting, compared to Europe. In 1996, 
Giuseppe Passarino and colleagues published evidence for a "dilution" of an ancient 
mtDNA marker in northern India by Caucasoid populations coming in from western 
Asia, thus supporting a demic spread of Indo-Europeans into India. In 2001, Lluis Quintana-Murci and colleagues carried this perspective further with an analysis of Ychromosomes, suggesting two episodes of demic diffusion from the northwest. The 
first, represented by Y-chromosome haplogroup 9, accounts for 30 to 60 percent of 
Southwest Asian lineages and -20 percent of those in Pakistan and northern India. 
This haplogroup is stated to relate to Elamo-Dravidian movement from Iran. The 
second, represented by Y-chromosome haplogroup 3, is common in central Asia and 
northern India, and is stated to record the movement of Indo-European speakers. 
The spread of haplogroup 9 occurred between 4,000 and 6,000 years ago, haplogroup 
3 between 3,500 and 4,500. The authors conclude "The geographical distributions, 
observed clines, and estimated ages of Hg-9 and Hg-3 chromosomes in southwestern 
Asia all support a model of demic diffusion of early farmers from southwestern Iran 
- and nomads from western and central Asia - into India, bringing the spread of 
genes and cultures (including language)" (Quintana-Murci et al. 2001:541).

Support for cultural diffusion models is not lacking in this region, however. Toomas 
Kivisild and colleagues (2003) claim that the northern Indian Y-chromosome lineages 
could be more ancient than Quintana-Murci and colleagues suggest, indeed much 
older than the Neolithic. They allow an estimate of only -8 percent of "Neolithic" 
lineages in South Asia, thus arguing for only a very small amount of population 
movement from the west associated with early farmers and Indo-Aryans.

This rather brief review indicates that the conclusions for Asia are no firmer than 
those for Europe. Can we add more from skeletal anthropology? Brian Hemphill and 
colleagues (1991) have summarized a great deal of data on Harappan and related 
skeletal populations, noting a progressive decline in dental health since the early 
Neolithic, and the possibility of a population change in terms of non-metric dental 
characters between 6000 and 4500 BC. They also note that the population resident at 
Mohenjo-Daro during the Harappan was morphologically different from other 
Harappan populations. The Harappans as a whole resembled Iranian populations in 
cranial terms, whereas the older Neolithic population at Mehrgarh resembled that 
from Chalcolithic Inamgaon in Maharashtra. It is not clear if such observations can 
be related usefully to questions of Indo-Aryan and Elamo-Dravidian origins, but they 
certainly do not support any total isolation of the subcontinent since the Paleolithic.

First Farmers: The Origins of Agricultural Societies by Peter Bellwood
    
    
    
    
    
  

  

Africa

In 1987, Laurent Excoffier and colleagues noted close relationships between African 
major linguistic populations and the genetic geography of the Rhesus blood group 
system, protein systems, and DNA molecules. Bantu-speakers were stated to be fairly 
homogeneous genetically, and distinct from Afroasiatic-speakers. Southern Bantu 
populations revealed evidence for past admixture with Khoisan populations. In 1996, 
Hirnla Soodyall and colleagues suggested that a distinctive mtDNA 9-base-pair deletion, 
different in origin from a similar deletion found in many East Asian populations, spread 
widely during Bantu expansion, also being found through admixture in Pygmy populations. The deletion, however, does not occur in other Niger-Congo speakers in West 
Africa, and so probably originated after Bantu expansion had commenced.

Genetic support for demic diffusion as part of the Bantu spread is thus quite firm. 
In 1996, Elizabeth Watson and colleagues analyzed African mtDNA sequences to 
indicate much greater nucleotide sequence variability amongst hunter-gatherer populations than amongst farmers and pastoralists. The results were interpreted to suggest that the farmers and pastoralists (including Bantu-speakers) have increased their 
population sizes relatively recently, whereas the hunter-gatherers have had stable 
population sizes. In 1997, Estella Poloni and colleagues showed that Y-chromosome 
lineage variation is well correlated with language family distributions in Africa and 
Eurasia. Their Y-chromosome molecular clock calculations suggested that speakers 
of Niger-Congo languages began to spread around 4,000 years ago, Afroasiatic speakers 
around 8,900 years ago, and Indo-European speakers around 7,400 years ago.

Poloni et al. also showed that Afroasiatic-speakers in Ethiopia share Y-chromosome 
haplotypes with people in Southwest Asia, but have essentially local mtDNA lineages. Some Khoisan populations in the south have admixtures of Niger-Congo Ychromosome lineages with Khoisan mtDNA. Both these situations suggest a tendency 
for males to disperse further than females, and consequently to have a wider genetic 
impact. This view was given further support in 2001, when Peter Underhill and 
colleagues (2001 a) indicated that Bantu migration is strongly marked by the distribution 
of Y-chromosome haplogroup III, but Bantu mtDNA haplogroups are more localized.

The African genetic data thus seem to agree closely on the significance of Bantu 
population expansion. For other populations, including Afroasiatic-speakers, the data 
are not so clear (Barbujani et al. 1994), and research still has rather a long way to go.

First Farmers: The Origins of Agricultural Societies by Peter Bellwood
    
    
    
    
    
  

  

East Asia

The most recent worldwide population tree published by Luca Cavalli-Sforza and 
Marcus Feldman (2003), based on analysis of polymorphisms in 120 protein systems 
in 1915 human populations, groups Southeast Asians with Pacific Islanders (excluding 
New Guinea), and then at a higher level with New Guineans and Australian Aborigines. 
A completely separate extra-African group, comprising the rest of out-of-Africa mankind, includes Northeast Asians, American Indians, and Europeans. Such high-level 
groupings do not inform greatly about the issues under debate here and probably 
reflect mainly Pleistocene movements of modern humans, in two spread processes 
into northern and southern East Asia respectively. Subsequent expansions of farming 
populations have been essentially confined to within each of these two zones rather 
than across both, the only exception in prehistoric times perhaps being the expansion 
of Tibeto-Burman speakers into Southeast Asia. Much, of course, depends on where 
one places the boundary between northern and southern East Asia - presumably in 
terms of this analysis it falls somewhere in central China, north of the regions whence 
the dispersals of Austroasiatic, Tai, Hmong-Mien, and Austronesian peoples are claimed 
to have begun (Figure 10.8B). Tatiana Karafet and colleagues (2001) also underline 
distinctions between Northeast and Southeast Asian populations in Y-chromosome 
haplogroups, linking central Asian Turkic populations and Tibeto-Burman speakers 
to Northeast Asians.'

In contrast to the above, Peter Underhill and colleagues (2001 a) imply closer northsouth Asian relationships in terms of the spread of group VII Y-chromosome lineages, stating that that they probably originated in northern China and spread with 
millet and rice agriculture on a large scale, analogous to the spread of group III 
lineages by Bantu-speakers. Group VII lineages dominate all of the East Asian mainland, from northern China to Thailand.

This observation of close relationships right through East Asia is supported very 
strongly by analyses of ancient crania. Johan Kamminga and Richard Wright (1988) 
have observed that Late Paleolithic crania from China, particularly from the Upper 
Cave at Zhoukoudian, were not morphologically ancestral to the modern East Asian 
population, raising the possibility that the latter spread from an unknown homeland 
in Neolithic times. These Paleolithic people instead resembled the pre Japanese 
Jomon population of Japan between about 12,000 and 2,000 years ago, prior to the 
arrival there of Yayoi rice farmers. In China, fully Mongoloid cranial features first 
appear in the early Neolithic, for instance at the site ofJiahu in the Huai valley (Chen 
and Zhang 1998). Peter Brown (1998, 1999) extends these observations to the whole 
of China, contending that Paleolithic skulls such as those from Liujiang and 
Minatogawa, as well as Upper Cave, are not Mongoloid at all, whereas Neolithic 
samples from sites such as Dawenkou, Jiangzhai (Yangshao culture), and Jiahu most 
certainly are.

Considerable population replacement during the Chinese Neolithic is therefore 
indicated from the skeletal perspective, as likewise during the expansion of Yayoi rice 
agriculturalists from Korea into Japan at about 300 BC (Hudson 1999, 2003). The 
genetic perspective seems to differ, and debate will doubtless continue.

First Farmers: The Origins of Agricultural Societies by Peter Bellwood
    
    
    
    
    
  

  

Southeast Asia and Oceania (mainly Austronesians)

A great deal of the genetic and skeletal research in this region has been driven by a 
scholarly obsession with the origins of the Polynesians. I have already summarized 
elsewhere the results of much of this research (Bellwood 1978a, 1993, 1997a ), concluding that pre-Neolithic populations in Island Southeast Asia, especially Indonesia, 
formed a westerly extension of the Australomelanesian population that had been 
established in the western Pacific (including Australia) since at least 40,000 years ago. 
Neolithic population movements, especially of Austronesian speakers into the islands 
and of Austroasiatic speakers on the Southeast Asian mainland, then brought in Asian 
(Southern Mongoloid) genotypes that mixed with those of the preceding populations, 
being even absorbed by them in Island Melanesia and to a lesser extent in the Malay 
Peninsula and eastern Indonesia. The result is that today one can see a cline from 
Asian into Australomelanesian characteristics running from north to south and from 
west to east, from Island Southeast Asia into Island Melanesia, and southward down 
the Malay Peninsula. The cline from Melanesia into Polynesia trends in the opposite 
direction, with Asian characters coming back in high proportion as one moves into 
eastern Polynesia and eastern Micronesia.

Figure 11.2 Diagram of relationships between Asian and Oceanic populations based on a 
cluster analysis of 29 cranial measurements recorded on 53 male samples. The samples are 
of various dates from possibly Neolithic and Bronze Age to relatively recent. From 
Pietrusewsky and Chang 2003.

The peoples of New Guinea, despite developing very early and independent 
agriculture, cannot really be shown to have expanded very far in a geographical 
sense, except in terms of genetic contribution to many present-day Austronesian 
speakers in eastern Indonesia (especially Moluccas and eastern Lesser Sundas) and 
Island Melanesia, eastward to Fiji. Recent mtDNA research does, however, indicate a 
lack of lineage diversity in the New Guinea Highlands that could relate to agriculturally driven population dispersal (Hagelberg et al. 1999:149).

The most complete analysis of East Asian and Oceanic cranial data is that by 
Michael Pietrusewsky (1999), whose cluster analysis (shown in Figure 11.2) expresses 
not just geographical but also phylogenetic relationships. In East Asia, this tree clearly 
separates Jomon and Ainu populations from Japanese. It also indicates the fairly high 
degree of diversity present in "Chinese" samples, and links all Southeast Asians with 
these in a large Asian branch at the top of the diagram. Close to this Asian branch 
come Polynesians and Micronesians, with Melanesians and Australians having very 
different cranial characteristics and belonging in a separate branch of their own. 
Perhaps most interestingly, in view of the discussion to follow, is Pietrusewsky's 
recent conclusion (Pietrusewsky and Chang 2003:293) that "Connections between 
Taiwan aboriginal groups and cranial series from Polynesia suggest that Taiwan's 
aboriginal inhabitants may have been the ancestral source of these inhabitants of 
remote Oceania." It is also worth noting that the deep divisions between East 
and Southeast Asians favored by some geneticists (above) are not visible in these 
cranial data.

We now move to the genetics, beginning with the broad question of Austronesian 
origins and dispersals and picking up the thread in 1995 when Alan Redd, Terry 
Melton, and colleagues published their analyses of the distribution of a feature within 
mtDNA known as the 9-base-pair deletion (Redd et al. 1995; Melton et al. 1995). This 
deletion contains a number of lineages defined by specific nucleotide substitutions. 
One, involving a substitution at position 16247, has become known as the "Polynesian 
motif" because it dominates in most modern Polynesian populations. Redd and 
colleagues suggested that this lineage spread from eastern Indonesia into Oceania at 
about 5,500 years ago. The ultimate source of the Austronesians as a whole, and of 
the substitution at position 16261 that occurred prior to 16247, was stated to be 
Taiwan, a view reached independently at the same time by Bryan Sykes and colleagues 
(1995), also using mtDNA data. Terry Melton and colleagues (1998) reemphasized 
that the ancestral mtDNA substitutions (excluding 16247) within the 9-base-pair 
deletion haplogroup had spread into Southeast Asia and Oceania through a Taiwan 
bottleneck (see also Hagelberg et al. 1999; Hagelberg 2000).

These conclusions are in accord with those of several other biochemists and 
geneticists. Koji Lum and Rebecca Cann (1998) have noted that Polynesian mtDNA 
very clearly links these people with Southeast Asians rather than Melanesians, a 
conclusion also drawn by Andrew Merriwether and colleagues (1999), who stress 
very firmly that Polynesian maternal ancestry cannot be derived to any major degree 
from Melanesia. All authorities agree that the Polynesian mtDNA motif (with the 
16247 substitution) originated in eastern Indonesia rather than in Taiwan, where only the antecedent mutations are present, a situation suggesting that the mutation 
might have occurred during the dispersal process itself.

By 1998, Koji Lum and colleagues (1998, 2002) were already noting that about 
30 percent of Polynesian nuclear genes are probably Melanesian, and this they related 
to extensive male gene flow from Papuan into Austronesian communities as the 
Austronesian dispersal progressed eastward. In a sense, the mtDNA story was beginning to look like an "express train" from Southeast Asia into the Pacific, to use the 
metaphor of Jared Diamond (1988), whereas the nuclear DNA and (later on) the 
Y-chromosome stories would be seen to relate more to Darwin's "entangled bank" 
metaphor as used by John Terrell (1988). Women traveled early and far with the 
initial migrants, but their female descendants stayed essentially in place, whereas 
males have always had a propensity to roam (Hage and Marck 2003 discuss these 
observations from an anthropological perspective).

The concept of considerable male-mediated gene flow from Papuan into Austronesian populations in Oceania was soon given further stimulus by Y-chromosome 
research. Manfred Kayser and colleagues (2000) claimed that three Polynesian 
Y-chromosome haplotypes found in a small sample of Cook Islanders could have 
originated in Melanesia, even though they also occur in island Southeast Asia. Their 
conclusions differed from those presented in another study by Bing Su and colleagues 
(2000), who regarded all Polynesian Y-chromosomes as being derived from Southeast 
Asia, with none at all from Melanesia. Such difficulties reflect in part an analysis of 
different markers by the different research teams, and Kayser states that the results of 
both analyses could be compatible.

One such compatible conclusion was announced in 2001, when Cristian Capelli 
and colleagues (2001) provided an overall Y-chromosome view of Pacific, Southeast 
Asian, and southern Chinese relationships. Austronesian dispersal from southern 
China and Taiwan into Island Southeast appears to be well recorded by their Y 
haplogroups H and L (now more commonly termed 03: Cox 2004), the latter 
having an apparent origin during the early Holocene and occurring widely and 
frequently in South China, southern Taiwan, Island Southeast Asia, and Polynesia. 
Eastern Indonesians and Melanesians have haplogroups that are mainly indigenous to the western Pacific region (Cox 2004). Polynesians reveal great variation 
as a result of genetic drift, but basically they combine both the Melanesian and 
the "Austronesian" haplogroups in proportions that differ from one island group 
to another.

All the Y-chromosome information on Austronesians presented so far fits quite 
well with what we can read from the archaeology and linguistics. An expanding 
population with Y-chromosome haplogroups that probably originated in southern 
China/Taiwan mixed increasingly with indigenous populations as it moved southward and eastward, virtually disappearing eventually in a genetic sense in Island 
Melanesia, but continuing eastward again through a series of founder bottlenecks 
into Polynesia. Using a different set of Y-chromosome data, Peter Underhill and 
colleagues (2001b) state: "The Y-chromosome results support a pattern of complex 
interrelationships between Southeast Asia, Melanesia, and Polynesia, in contrast to mtDNA and linguistic data, which uphold a rapid and homogeneous Austronesian 
expansion. The Y-chromosome data highlight a distinctive gender-modulated pattern 
of differential gene flow in the history of Polynesia." Matthew Hurles and colleagues, 
working with satellite markers within the Y-chromosome, provide the additional 
conclusion: "[our] study, while not strongly supporting the hypothesis of a rapid 
Austronesian expansion from Taiwan, is not necessarily incompatible with it. Biological and cultural origins can become uncoupled to varying degrees" (Hurles et al. 
2002:301; Hurles 2003).

So, can we relax now with a conclusion from genetics that Austronesian prehistory witnessed initial fairly clear-cut dispersal from southern China and Taiwan, via 
Island Southeast Asia, into Oceania, accompanied by considerable intermixing with 
indigenous populations, and eventually with a considerable quantity of male-focused 
gene flow out of Melanesia? I certainly believe that we can, but a team of mtDNA 
researchers comprising Martin Richards, Stephen Oppenheimer, and Bryan Sykes 
have recently stated otherwise (Richards et al. 1998; Oppenheimer and Richards 
2001a, 2001b, 2003). They claim that Polynesians are of separate biological origin 
from other Austronesians, since the "Polynesian motif" can in their opinion be clocked 
to a mutation in eastern Indonesia that occurred between 5,500 and 34,500 years ago. 
Because this motif does not appear to occur in its "final" form with the mutation at 
position 16247 in Taiwan, the Philippines, or much of Indonesia, and because their 
calculated age range precedes any archaeological or linguistic evidence for Austronesian 
dispersal, they claim that Polynesians are derived from Pleistocene populations located 
in eastern Indonesia, perhaps somewhere east of the Wallace Line (Sulawesi, Moluccas, 
or Lesser Sundas). They also suggest that the whole of the Austronesian dispersal in 
the linguistic sense might have originated in eastern Indonesia, a hypothesis also 
foreshadowed in Y chromosome research by Bing Su and colleagues (2000; but see 
contrary arguments by Reid 2001).

Linguistically and archaeologically, deriving all Austronesian-speaking populations 
from Pleistocene forebears in eastern Indonesia is not a credible proposition. To 
claim a biological dispersal of Austronesian-speaking peoples from eastern Indonesia 
to Taiwan would involve movement in a direction completely opposed to that of the 
archaeology and the languages. This is no doubt possible, but extremely unlikely 
given any balanced worldwide comparative view of multidisciplinary human history. 
But what of the Polynesians and the Polynesian mtDNA motif? There are problems 
here, since firstly, this motif also occurs in Madagascar in high frequency, a situation 
that recently led Bryan Sykes (1999b:109) to claim that Madagascar was settled by 
Polynesians sailing south of Australia. However, not only do the Malagasy languages 
derive in the main from southern Borneo, but Madagascar prehistory since settlement 
occurred about AD 500 is fully ceramic, whereas Polynesians lost pottery making 
about 2,000 years ago. There is absolutely nothing in the archaeological or linguistic 
records that could possibly bring Malagasy settlers, with their Malay-mediated Sanskrit 
loans (Adelaar 1995), from Polynesia.

Instead, we seem to have three possibilities to explain the situation recognized by 
Oppenheimer and Richards with the Polynesian motif:

1. If populations with a Polynesian-like and Asian-derived morphology had spread 
into eastern Indonesia long before the period of Austronesian dispersal, then the 
haplotype could have been acquired from them much later by the Austronesian 
populations ancestral to Polynesians. This is possible in theory, and would allow 
for a greater level of accommodation between the two opposing reconstructions. 
The main problem is that there is no skeletal evidence to indicate the presence of 
such a Polynesian-like population in eastern Indonesia prior to the Holocene, 
although this may simply reflect lack of data.

2. The molecular clock calculation for the origin of the Polynesian motif may be 
wrong, given that there is now a voluminous literature of debate and disagreement about this kind of chronological calculation. If wrong, then perhaps the 
mutation could have occurred during Austronesian dispersal after 4,000 years 
ago in eastern Indonesia. In other words, is the place of origin of the Polynesian 
motif correct, but the calculated date of its mutation wrong?'

3. Could early Austronesians have picked up the Polynesian motif from an indigenous source in eastern Indonesia, initially through only one or two female 
individuals, whose descendants soon thereafter, as a result of considerable fecundity in bottleneck situations, raised the frequency of its occurrence in the ancestral Polynesian (Lapita) population? This option seems possible, but is only 
necessary if a Pleistocene date for the origin of the Polynesian motif is supported 
by future calculations.

Oppenheimer and Richards also suggest that the alpha-globin genes of Polynesians 
(which code for part of the hemoglobin molecule) most likely originated east of the 
Wallace Line. This may be correct, but since abnormal hemoglobins are involved 
throughout the tropical Old World in defenses against malaria it seems likely that 
natural selection lies behind the situation, rather than population origin factors themselves. Eastern Indonesia and Melanesia, even today, still have very virulent forms of 
malaria, and early Austronesians were probably initially without any genetic variants 
that confer resistance (Serjeantson and Gao 1995; Fix 2002).

This review of Austronesian genetic ancestry has gone into detail since this region, 
like Europe, has one of the densest debates between archaeologists, linguists, and 
biologists currently under way anywhere in the world. As it happens, just after this 
chapter was drafted, I was asked to read a PhD thesis by Murray Cox (2003), a 
biochemist from the University of Otago in New Zealand and now based in the 
Leverhulme Centre for Human Evolutionary Studies in Cambridge. Cox has reviewed 
the Y and mtDNA data for Austronesians in detail, and points out that, perhaps as 
expected, modern Austronesians only reveal (so far) about 20 percent of the genes 
likely to have been carried by their Neolithic Austronesian ancestors, an average 
situation perhaps similar to that for Europe. But Cox also recalculates the age of the 
Polynesian motif, bringing it much closer to overlap with the period of Austronesian 
migration, and of similar Holocene age to Asian Y-chromosome haplogroup 03, as 
discussed above. Cox clearly favors what he terms a "Modified Out of Taiwan Model" 
for Austronesian dispersal, which is basically the model that I favor.

Finally, one other region overlapping with Austronesia where there has recently 
been debate over population history is the Malay Peninsula, with its marked population variations running from southern Thailand toward Singapore. My own view is 
that three major population movements into the Peninsula are represented in present 
patterns of diversity (Bellwood 1993, 1997a). The Semang Negritos are descendants 
of early Hoabinhian foragers who spread widely through the Peninsula, probably 
moving inland as postglacial sea levels rose in the early Holocene. According to 
David Bulbeck (2003), they ultimately acquired shorter stature within the past few 
millennia in the interior rain-forest environment. They were followed by ancestral 
Senoi farmers who moved down from southern Thailand about 4,000 years ago, 
bringing Neolithic artifacts and Austroasiatic ("Aslian") languages into the Peninsula, 
the latter being eventually adopted by the Semang foragers, just as Negritos in the 
Philippines have adopted Austronesian languages. The ancestors of the third major 
group, the Austronesian-speaking Malays, arrived during the Iron Age, about 500 BC 
or later, from western Borneo and/or Sumatra.

This relatively simple series of cultural and biological successions, which in my 
view still explains the situation best, has also been examined by anthropologist Geoffrey 
Benjamin (1985). He favors the view that the two Aslian populations are of indigenous Peninsula origin and have basically differentiated their lifestyles, languages, 
and phenotypes in situ as a result of social and economic factors (e.g., mobile hunting 
vs. sedentary farming, group exogamy vs. endogamy, differential involvement in 
trade). Benjamin's view has recently been upheld by David Bulbeck (2004) from a 
skeletal perspective. Geneticist Alan Fix (1999, 2000, 2002) also favors Benjamin's 
hypothesis of internal cultural and biological genesis, but concludes that modem 
genetic data cannot really prove or disprove the occurrence of ancient migrations, 
noting on several occasions that history may not be read simply from gene trees.

For what it is worth, genetic research (Saba et al. 1995) suggests that the Semai 
Senoi of Malaysia and the Khmers of Cambodia are fairly closely related in their 
blood genetic markers (proteins and enzymes), and if this is an indication of shared 
ancestry then it is much easier to locate it in prehistoric, perhaps Neolithic times, 
than in historical times. The Khmer empire of Angkor certainly never stretched as far 
as the jungled interior of Peninsular Malaysia, and we have no evidence that any 
significant gene flow into the southern Malay Peninsula occurred as recently as this 
(ca. 12th century AD). I can only conclude that the Malay Peninsula is still an enigmatic 
region and simple answers to population history will not come easily.

First Farmers: The Origins of Agricultural Societies by Peter Bellwood
    
    
    
    
    
  

  

The Americas

The Americas do not offer very rich data on specific questions of farming population 
and language family ancestry, and I must also confess to a lack of access to many of 
the relevant sources. But a few observations are of great interest. For instance, Sloan 
Williams and colleagues (2002) note that modem Yanomama village populations in 
Venezuela and Brazil, with high levels of within-village endogamy, can be clearly 
differentiated from each other in terms of nuclear genetic markers. The genetic distances between these village populations also correlate well with their recorded 
histories of fission. In addition, Nelson Fagundes and colleagues (2002) have found 
that mtDNA relationships follow linguistic relationships very clearly amongst Tupianspeakers in Brazil. This is very hopeful news for those interested in tracking the 
populations associated with language families back through time.

But when Williams et al. used mtDNA sequences as opposed to nuclear genetic 
data for differentiating Yanomama village populations, they were found not to work 
so well, apparently owing to sex-specific migration and sampling issues. In this regard, therefore, it is interesting that Ripan Malhi and colleagues (2003) suggest that 
mtDNA haplotypes in Mexico and the US Southwest relate more to geography than 
to language groupings. They state that early Uto-Aztecan languages were spread by 
male rather than female migrations, the former perhaps being identifiable through 
the wide distribution of a nuclear marker called Albumin*Mexico. The prospect of 
females staying close to home and males migrating makes a degree of sense, but one 
wonders how the claimed results reflect sampling and other factors.

In addition, the Americas were settled so recently in time that the major degree of 
biological differentiation that we see between populations of Old World origin has 
never had time to develop. Most population movements in the past, especially incremental rather than long-distance ones, would probably have mingled people already 
quite closely related in terms of genetic descent. If the Americas are to provide genetic 
data useful for questions of farming dispersal, much more research will be needed.

First Farmers: The Origins of Agricultural Societies by Peter Bellwood
    
    
    
    
    
  

  

Did Early Farmers Spread through Processes of Demic Diffusion?

There is no single answer to this question, since local situations clearly differ. Demic 
diffusion alone can never have been the source of any language family or agricultural 
complex. But demic diffusion, with constant processes of population mixing, sexspecific differential migration, and successive bottlenecks, presents a much more likely 
conclusion. Allowing for such a combination of processes means we are not forced 
into having the Neolithic Britons genetically identical to the Neolithic Anatolians, or 
the modern Solomon Islanders genetically identical to the modern Formosans.

As the lengthy biological debates continue, for instance about the origins of the 
Europeans or the Austronesians, such middle-of-the-road conclusions become increasingly self-evident. But this does not mean that the human past is just a formless 
pattern of drift, with no foci of innovation or dispersal ever present. We cannot 
regard the human archaeological, linguistic, and biological records as merely the 
products of mutation and drift "in place" since humans in some sentient form first 
spread across the earth. To give all ancient societies an equal role in the creation of a 
formless and creolized past is just as unfair to those long dead and forgotten as is the 
opposite polarization, represented by total domination and replacement of earlier 
populations. We need a balance, so perhaps it is time to move toward a conclusion.
