Chapter 12 - The Nature of Early Agricultural Expansion
=======================================================

First Farmers: The Origins of Agricultural Societies by Peter Bellwood
    
    
    
    
    
  

  

Chapter 12

The Nature of Early Agricultural 

Expansion

The spreads of early agricultural populations, through regions formerly occupied 
by hunter-gatherers, created many basic patterns in the distributions of languages, 
cultures, and genotypes that still survive today across large parts of the temperate 
and tropical regions of the earth. However, dispersal did not occur out of all regions 
of agricultural origin. Neither did languages, cultures, and genotypes always spread 
in perfect unison. The totality of the human past has been very complex indeed.

Are there any cross-cultural generalizations that can be made about how and why 
the various agricultural "unfoldings" differed in spatial and temporal expression? Can 
early farming spreads be classified in terms of observable and sometimes quantifiable 
variables, such as rate of frontier movement, overall chronology, and degree of 
isomorphism in linguistic, cultural, and biological patterns?

In order to approach these questions we consider first of all two polar situations. 
At one extreme, the replacement of population and culture is total, or close to it. At 
the other extreme, languages and cultural configurations are adopted by indigenous 
populations, with no expansion of externally derived population at all. As previous 
chapters should have indicated, both these extremes are highly unlikely ever to have 
occurred in reality, at least not in previously occupied landscapes. But we can, for 
heuristic purposes, still list ideal expectations for them.

In the first situation, of complete ethnolinguistic and population replacement, there 
will be no significant substratum survival (and none at all in landscapes previously 
unoccupied). Barring subsequent population expansions, which of course start the 
process all over again, the linguistic pattern will reveal no isolates, no traces of pidginization or interference through language shift, and there should be fairly even rates 
of lexical change across subgroups. The archaeological pattern will be widespread 
and stylistically homogeneous to begin with, breaking down gradually into regional 
expressions with the passage of time. Stylistic patterns should lose homogeneity fairly evenly, reflecting time and geography rather than hybridization. Genetic and 
skeletal evidence should indicate population replacement.

In the second situation, of cultural and linguistic dispersal through adoption/shift 
only, with no population movement, substratum survival will be complete. The 
linguistic pattern will probably reveal lots of isolates where shift did not occur, strong 
evidence for interference through language shift, and great variation in rates of lexical change according to the varying structures of the indigenous adopting societies. 
The archaeological pattern will show stylistic diversity continuing from prior time 
periods, but with addition of the new technological and economic elements driving 
the cultural dispersal (e.g., agriculture, ground stone, pottery). Genetic and skeletal 
evidence should indicate population continuity.

Possible situations which fall between these two extremes are of course almost 
infinite in variation. They will be revealed most clearly by any disequilibrium between 
the archaeological, linguistic, and biological sources of data. For instance, language 
can often show evidence of "strong" spread, with no interstitial isolates and few 
substratum traces, while patterning in human biology can be more diverse. This is 
the case in eastern Indonesia and Island Melanesia, where it can perhaps be explained 
by a hypothesis of powerful Austronesian linguistic dispersal through both nativespeaker movement and language shift, but with a relatively much greater degree of 
mixing between Asian and Melanesian biological populations. Material culture falls 
somewhere in-between - the components are not so locked together as are the 
structural elements of a language, but not so free to recombine attributes as are 
chromosomes.

First Farmers: The Origins of Agricultural Societies by Peter Bellwood
    
    
    
    
    
  

  

Homeland, Spread, and Friction Zones, plus Overshoot

In a recent review of the many issues surrounding early farming dispersal (Bellwood 
2001b), I found it useful to visualize four different zonal concepts as involved in 
processes of agricultural origin and spread.

i. Homeland or starburst zones reveal upwelling patterns with radial spread, high 
suitability for agriculture, and of course considerable hunter-to-farmer continuity 
across the agricultural transitions. Examples include the major regions of agricultural and language family origin discussed in previous chapters.

2. Spread zones (following earlier usage of this term, with a slightly different 
meaning, by linguist Johanna Nichols) fall close to the replacement extreme 
described above, with widespread levels of homogeneity and strong indications 
of temporal discontinuity in cultural trajectory. Rates of spread tend to be high, 
until environmental or demographic limitations intervene. Some examples of 
Neolithic or Formative spread zones are illustrated in Figure 1.3.

3. Friction zones are characterized by genetic admixture and cultural reticulation 
between hunters and farmers. Some friction zones lie at the end of the road for 
agriculture, for instance in northern and western Europe, where climatic factors or high hunter-gatherer densities backed by coastlines imposed barriers to further spread. In these cases, rates of farming spread slowed down markedly. But 
in other cases, for instance lowland New Guinea with respect to Austronesian 
spread, the friction zone was not at the end of the line, but rather a salient in its 
middle. In the case of the Lapita settlement of western Oceania, the rate of 
spread was extremely rapid because rich resources continued beyond western 
Melanesia, in previously uninhabited Oceanic islands. On the other hand, 
Austronesian dispersal was very slow to penetrate New Guinea itself from relatively nearby Lapita sources (Table 12.1). Thus, the friction zone concept refers 
essentially to a relatively high degree of reticulation, but not necessarily to a fast 
or slow rate of foundation spread.

4. Finally, we have those zones of overshoot where farmers found themselves, 
for varying reasons, in adverse environments and so modified their economies 
accordingly. The southern Maoris, the Punan of Borneo, and the Numic speakers 
of the Great Basin would appear to be excellent examples of this.

Looking at a sample of spread and friction zones on a worldwide basis, combined 
with issues of tempo, one comes up with some interesting observations (Table 12.1). 
Jared Diamond (1994) is quite correct to point out that early farmers tended to move 
more rapidly along latitudes than across them, mainly because environments remain 
similar along latitudes, and the crucial factor of day length that triggers germination 
in cereals and legumes changes little. But we do have cases of rapid cross-latitudinal 
spread - Iron Age farmers in eastern and southern Africa, for instance. We also have 
converse cases of very slow spread along latitudes, for instance from the Indus into 
India. The reason for this was essentially the latitudinal switch in this region from a 
winter to a summer rainfall regime. Fundamental shifts in rainfall seasonality stopped 
agriculturalists (as opposed to pastoralists) from spreading into southwestern Africa, 
also California, they slowed down the spread into northern India, and rendered the 
spread of the southwest Asian farming system that entered Egypt a very difficult 
matter in terms of the rest of Africa. Although wheat and other winter crops eventually made their way to the Ethiopian Highlands, they never spread further.

So one conclusion I would draw from Table 12.1 is that changes in rainfall 
seasonality formed much greater barriers to early farmers than changes in temperature (except when the growing season shrank below length requirements for the 
available crops). But there are exceptions, and one of these is southern China. The 
longitudinal spread through southern China into Southeast Asia was much slower 
than that into southern Africa, at least until Austronesian maritime technology lifted 
the lid and allowed the rapid sea-borne colonization of Island Southeast Asia and 
Oceania. The climates of southern China and southeastern Africa were not sufficiently different from the relevant homeland climates, in my view, to be the sole 
causes of the differences in dispersal rate. Instead, technological development was 
often as important as environmental suitability in the lubrication or hindrance of 
agricultural spread. In southern China the technology was purely Neolithic at the time 
of farming dispersal, and here the population densities of preexisting hunter-gatherer populations, especially in rugged or coastal terrain, were evidently significant. In Africa, 
spreading Bantu farmers had access to iron tools, a major technological advantage.

The carrying capacities of agricultural landscapes, and the negative impacts wrought 
upon them by climate change and human overexploitation, are also of course 
extremely relevant as determinants of rates of spread of pioneer farmers. So too are 
the production levels of the agricultural and pastoral systems themselves. David 
Harris (2003), for instance, regards cereal systems as more expansive than tuber 
systems, an opinion amply substantiated by the archaeological record.

Some of the above might seem rather obvious when it is spelt out in this way. Yet 
there is an immense amount of detail and understanding to be squeezed out of 
comparative data such as this. Table 12.1, for instance, shows some of the variations 
in rates of spread that we can expect under spread zone and friction zone conditions. 
It will be noted how maritime and Iron Age spreads can be very fast indeed. My 
suspicion is that the rate of spread of farming increased very rapidly as the degree of 
environmental difficulty declined and as technological capacity increased. Without a 
need for any adjustment to differing environmental circumstances, cereal-based cultures in spread mode could generate sufficient demographic impetus to snowball 
along very far and very fast indeed.

First Farmers: The Origins of Agricultural Societies by Peter Bellwood
    
    
    
    
    
  

  

The Stages within a Process of Agricultural Genesis 

and Dispersal

The above discussion has been concerned mainly with patterns of dispersal. Let us 
now turn to patterns of development through time. It can be hypothesized that 
agricultural systems have developed fundamentally through the following very generalized stages.

1. Pre farming. During terminal phases of hunting and gathering we can expect deep 
cultural heterogeneity if populations had already been in place for many millennia. 
This would be so even in cases of high latitude or and zone repopulation consequent upon terminal Pleistocene environmental change, since most agricultural dispersals took place many millennia after the final amelioration that 
occurred, prior to the onset of the Younger Dryas, even in the Middle East.

2. Transition to fanning. With trends toward agricultural production during the 
Holocene we can expect increasing sedentism, population density, and social 
complexity to have developed. With the establishment of farming, larger communities allowed village-endogamous mating networks to operate, even though 
the archaeological record reveals widening spheres of interaction for the movement of raw materials, concepts, and aspects of style. In such circumstances, 
certain languages could have been used for communication across wide areas, 
perhaps normally through stable bilingualism rather than language replacement. 
Specific loan words for cultural items could have spread over very large distances 
within such networks. In Neolithic/ Formative circumstances such languages were most probably natural languages, with genetic relatives, rather than pidgins of the 
types formed during the process of European colonial expansion and population 
relocation. Did such languages form the roots for subsequent language families?

3. Ensuing dependence upon farming, and dispersal. With increasing population growth, 
environmental impact, inter-group conflict, and demand for increased agricultural production, expansion from homeland/starburst regions began, centrifugal 
in pattern and derived mainly from peripheries rather than inner core regions. 
Expanding populations on peripheries would have shared many features of 
language and style due to previous interaction. Such sharing need not always 
indicate genetic relationship, although it may well do so in cases where two 
groups spread in different directions from a common homeland region. The 
resulting outward dispersals would thus contain many aspects of both genetic 
and prior borrowing relationship, in practice ambiguously intertwined. Meanwhile, the core regions, being circumscribed, would have had opportunities to 
intensify production in the direction of "civilization," even though in reality only 
a small number of regions were ever able to take this course. Others simply 
stabilized, some declined.

In general, we may expect the greatest degrees of correlation between patterns of 
material culture, language, and biology to occur in this third phase, at the cusp of an 
expansion as it progresses or hops through new territory. Such episodes will sometimes produce more homogeneous cultural patterns than existed in the agricultural 
homeland itself, since they will have predominantly phylogenetic (dispersal-based) 
rather than interactive foundations, consequent upon population and language spread, 
not upwelling. With settling-in comes reticulation, mixing with native populations, 
and assimilation. The intensity of reticulation will depend on local circumstances, 
including the relative demographic balance between newcomers and natives, the 
chronology and tempo of the mixing, technological differences, assortative mating 
patterns, and so forth. Newcomers can also bring in disease and warfare, but in 
pre-state early farmer circumstances we should expect native hunter-gatherer 
populations to survive genetically, even if not through language or material lifestyle 
in the long term.

The overall shape of the past is here regarded as one of dispersal-based pulsation at 
intervals, with reticulation in the periods (often extremely long periods) between. 
We cannot expect that the results of all past dispersals will be unambiguously obvious 
in present-day linguistic and biological patterns. But the major ones should be.

Perhaps the final conclusion should be that language families and early agricultural 
economies spread through hunter-gatherer landscapes in prehistory essentially through 
population growth and dispersal, but with admixture. Hunter-gatherer adoption was 
not the sole or main mechanism of spread, although it was of increasing importance 
as the prime conditions for demic diffusion of farmers became attenuated. Being 
indigenous is always a matter of degree.

For me, the excitement of research into the early farming dispersal hypothesis 
comes from its immense significance for the world as we know it today, or at least in its pre-colonial form prior to AD 1500. Our language families, our agricultural systems, 
even our races (whatever animosities one might harbor toward this concept) reflect 
the impacts of early agricultural dispersal very visibly indeed, even millennia after the 
events of concern passed from memory. Archaeology is of little value unless we can 
relate it to the here and now, and this is one arena in which it can broadcast its 
significance very lucidly indeed.

Another aspect of excitement for me is the fact that all populations in the world 
have somehow been involved in these early farming dispersals in some way or another, 
whether as initiators or receivers. Our world needs a story to bring peoples together, 
not to isolate their ancestors as archaeologically impressive but parochial one-off 
experiments. The human ability to migrate and successfully populate new environments was one of the greatest assets of the ancestors of all peoples in the world, at all 
levels from hunters through ancient farmers to early states. I hope that the future 
world order will harness this energy, which to me shows no signs of dissipation, in a 
humane and civilized way.
